//https://archive.org/stream/The7HabitsOfHighlyEffectivePeople_201809/02.%20The%207%20Habits%20of%20Highly%20Effective%20People_djvu.txt


"This remarkable book will be my gift to everyone I know." 
—Warren Bennis, author of On Becoming a Leader 

COVEY 



#iJr.^ 



$19.95 

"Stephen Covey has written a remarkable book 
about the human condition, so elegantly written, so 
understanding of our embedded concerns, so useful 
for our organizational and personal lives, that it's 
going to be my gift to everyone I know. Their grati- 
tude will be shown, I am convinced, in their work 
and in their self-worth." 

— Warren Bennis, 

Distinguished Professor of 
Business Administration, USC, 
and author of On Becoming a Leader 

In the inspirational tradition of The Road Less 
Traveled, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People 
is a holistic, integrated approach to solving personal 
and professional problems by becoming principle- 
centered. This is a revolutionary guidebook to 
achieving peace of mind within and building trust 
without by seeking the roots of human behavior in 
character and by learning principles rather than 
merely practices. 

"Stephen R. Covey's book teaches with power, con- 
viction, and feeling. Both the content and the meth- 
odology of these principles form a solid foundation 
for effective communication. As an educator, I find 
this book to be a significant addition to my library" 
— Wm. Rolfe Kerr, Utah Commissioner 
of Higher Education 

With pointed anecdotes and penetrating insights, 
Stephen R. Covey — leading management consultant 
and author of best-selling spiritual books — reveals 
how our actions follow from who we are. He shows 
how we can end self-defeating behavior at home and 
at work by adopting the Seven Habits of Highly 
Effective People. 

"The ethical basis for human relations in this book 
defines a way of life, not just a methodology for 
succeeding at business. That it works is apparent." 
— Bruce L. Christensen, President, 
Public Broadcasting Service 

Covey shows how the Seven Habits are not a 
"quick fix" but rather a step-by-step pathway to the 
principles of fairness, integrity, honesty, and human 
dignity that give us the security to adapt to change in 
our family and business lives — as well as the wis- 
dom and power to take advantage of the opportuni- 
ties such change creates. 

(continued on back flap) 



More advance praise for 

The Seven Habits 

of Highly Effective People 

by Stephen R. Covey 



"Stephen Covey is an American Socrates, opening your mind to 
the 'permanent things' — values, family, relationships, communi- 
cating. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People is a remarkable 
synthesis of important ideas that can lead to dramatic improve- 
ments in personal performance and satisfaction. This is a rich, 
'nourishing' book with a vital message for business people who are 
serious about real success and all that entails." 

— Brian Tracy, President of Brian Tracy 
Learning Systems, and author of 

Psychology of Achievement 



"I have learned so much from Stephen Covey over the years that 
every time I sit down to write, I'm worried about subconscious 
plagiarism! Seven Habits is not pop psychology or trendy self-help. 
It is solid wisdom and sound principles." 

— Richard M. Eyre, author of Life Balance 
and Teaching Children Values 



"I know of no one who has contributed more to helping leaders in 
our society than Stephen R. Covey. He is a master of motivation, 
business management, education, leadership, and successful com- 
ponents for effective human relations. I highly recommend this book 
to all because there is no literate person in our society who would not 
benefit by reading this book and applying its principles." 

— Senator Orrin G. Hatch 



"Winning is a habit. So is losing. So is Stephen Covey's obsession 
with the habits of people who are personally and professionally 
successful. Twenty-five years of experience, thought, and research 
have convinced Covey that seven habits distinguish the happy, 
healthy, successful from those who fail or who must sacrifice mean- 
ing and happiness for success in the narrow sense. More than a 
simple how-to. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People is a marvel- 
ous saga of one man's search for the essence of a life worth living." 

— Ron Zemke, coauthor of 

The Service Edge and Service America 



"Covey validates the durable truths as they apply to family, 
business, and society in general, sparing us the psycho-babble that 
pollutes so much of current literature on human relations. His 
book is not a photograph, but a process, and should be treated as 
such. He is neither an optimist nor a pessimist, but a possibilist, 
who believes that we and we alone can open the door to change 
within ourselves. There are many more than seven good reasons to 
read this book." 

— Steve Labunski, Executive Director, 
International Radio & Television Society 



"A wonderful contribution. Dr. Covey has synthesized the habits 
of our highest achievers and presented them in a powerful, easy to 
use program. We now have a blueprint for opening the American 
mind." 

— Charles Garfield 

author of Peak Performers 



"Truly a book for all seasons. A timeless source of invaluable 
wisdom for personal, family, or business use. These foundational 
principles are the key to the challenges of education and, thus, a 
key to a lasting competitive edge in today's chaotic worldwide 
marketplace. Must reading for anyone seeking to grow." 

— Charles "Red" Scott, CEO, Intermark, 
and President, Horatio Alger Assn. 
of Distinguished Americans 



"The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People suggests a discipline for 
our personal dealings with people which would be undoubtedly 
valuable if people thought to think about it." 

— ^James C. Fletcher 
Director, NASA 



"Seven Habits is an exceptional book. It does a better job of inspiring 
a person to integrate the different responsibilities in one's life — 
personal, family, and professional — than any other book I have 
read." 

— Paul H. Thompson, Dean, Marriott School of 
Management, BYU, and author of Novations 



"Goodbye, Dale Carnegie. Stephen Covey has had a profound 
influence on my life. His principles are powerful. They work. Buy 
this book. Read it, and as you live the principles your life will be 
enriched." 

— Robert G. Allen 

author of Creating Wealth and The Challenge 



"This book is filled with practical wisdom for people who want to 
take control of their lives, their businesses and their careers. Each 
time I read a section again I get new insights, which suggests the 
messages are fundamental and deep." 

— GiFFORD PiNCHOT III, Chairman, 

Pinchot and Co., and author of Intrapreneuring 



"In the '90s, America needs to unlock the door to increased 
productivity both on a business and personal basis. The best way 
to accomplish this goal is through enhancing the human resource. 
Dr. Covey's Seven Habits provides the guidelines for this to 
happen. These principles make great sense and are right on target 
for the times." 

— F. G. "Buck" Rodgers 
author of The IBM Way 



"Most of my learning has come from modeling after other people 
and what they do. Steve's book helps energize this modeling 
process through highly effective research and examples." 

— Fran Tarkenton, NFL Hall of Fame 

Quarterback, and Chairman of the Board, 
KnowledgeWare, Inc. 



"Not only does the 'character ethic' win hands down every time 
over the 'personality ethic' in the battle of effectiveness, it also will 
bring greater fulfillment and joy to individuals seeking meaning in 
their personal and professional lives. 

— Larry Wilson 

founder and CEO, Pecos River 
Learning Centers, Inc., and author of 

Changing the Game: The New Way to Sell 

"Stephen Covey's The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People is critical 
reading for people in all walks of life. For the manager, the parent, 
or the employee, these seven habits are the foundation of success- 
ful relationships and achievement. I have read most all of the most 
popular books on management, and I must say that Stephen 
Covey's book was one of the first that did not strike me as 
'motivational hype'; rather, it struck me as fundamental truth." 

— David Checketts 

General Manager, Utah Jazz 

"The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People is not only a great recipe 
for a more productive and happier life but also an action plan for 
implementation that works. It is a formula for vocational success. 
Best book of its kind that I have read." 

— T. N. Davidson, International President, 
Young Presidents' Organization, and 
Canadian Entrepreneur of the Year 

"Fundamentals are the key to success. Stephen Covey is a master 
of them. Buy his book, but most importantly, use it!" 

— Anthony Robbins 

author of Unlimited Power 



"This book contains the kind of penetrating truth about human 
nature that is usually found only in fiction. At the end, you will feel 
not only that you know Covey, but also that he knows you." 

— Orson Scott Card 

winner of the Hugo and Nebula Awards 



"Stephen Covey adds great value to any individual or organization, 
not just through his words. His vision and integrity — his personal 
example — move people beyond mere success." 

— Tom F. Crum, cofounder. The Windstar 

Foundation, and author of The Magic of Conflict 



"Stephen Covey's The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People offers us 
a treasure trove of thoughtful insights that are at once profound and 
life-transforming, and at the same time, practical and workable." 

— Don Williams 

CEO and Managing Partner, Trammell Crow Companies 



"With all the responsibilities and demands of time, travel, work, 
and families placed upon us in today's competitive world, it's a big 
plus to have Stephen Covey's The Seven Habits of Highly Effective 
People to refer to." 

— Marie Osmond 



"The Seven Habits has made a major difference in my life. I am 
happier, better able to help others, and a far more effective leader. 
The clearest way to express the power I see in this teaching is to tell 
you we have a firm plan to expand this teaching to all 1,300 Procter 
and Gamble Philippine employees. I sincerely believe that we will 
be able to measure the positive results of The Seven Habits over the 
next several years in terms of more satisfied people, happier 
families, share-driven profit growth, and increased contribution to 
this region of the world." 

— W. J. Wallace 

President, Procter and Gamble Philippines 



"Stephen Covey's inspirational book will undoubtedly be the 
psychology handbook of the '90s. The principles discussed are 
universal and can be applied to every aspect of life. These 
principles, however, are like an opera. They cannot simply be 
performed, they must be rehearsed!" 

— Ariel Bybee 

mezzo-soprano. Metropolitan Opera 



"Stephen Covey's most recent book. The Seven Habits of Highly 
Effective People, is worthwhile reading for anyone interested in 
achieving a balanced focus in their life. I believe this book has 
relevance for anyone who desires improvement in their under- 
standing of themselves, of their family relationships, and of their 
daily business and social interaction." 

— ^JoN Huntsman, Chairman and CEO, 

Huntsman Chemical Corp., and Vice-Chairman, 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce 



"In The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen Covey serves 
up a seven-course meal on how to take control of one's life and 
become the complete, fulfilling person one envisions. It is a 
satisfying, energetic, step-by-step book that is applicable for per- 
sonal and business progress." 

— Roger Staubach 

NFL Hall of Fame Quarterback 



"In golf you don't play your opponent, you play the course. 
Stephen Covey teaches principles that provide the same perspec- 
tive to lead your own course successfully in life." 

— ^Johnny Miller, professional golfer 



"A unique and meaningful assessment of worthwhile habits of 
effective self-management." 

— Steve Rowley 

President, Daytimers 



"This book is not only valuable for the businessman, but I feel that 
its principles will be extremely helpful to me in succeeding as a 
professional athlete. I also feel they could be directly influential in 
my personal life as well. They are easily adaptable to any aspect of 
my life and would be worthwhile for anyone to learn." 

— Steve Young, Quarterback, 
San Francisco 49ers 



"Stephen R. Covey has thought deeply and clearly about the 
principles of success. The conclusions he draws in this book 
underscore the need to restore the character ethic in our society. 
This work is a valuable addition to the literature of self-help." 

— W. Clement Stone 

founder. Success Magazine, and 
1981 Nobel Peace Prize Nominee 



"Stephen Covey has had an enormous impact on many of the most 
dynamic businesses in this country. No one can read this book and 
not become both a better person and leader if he can follow the 
principles so clearly laid out in this book." 

— Norman Brinker, Chairman and CEO, 
Chilis, Inc. 



"Stephen Covey's deliberate integration of life and principles leads 
to squaring inner thought and outward behavior, resulting in 
personal as well as public integrity. This book is a highly effective 
way to pursue character development." 

— Gregory J. Newell 

U.S. Ambassador to Sweden 



I 




Also by 
Stephen R. Covey 

Spiritual Roots of Human Relations 
How to Succeed with People 
The Divine Center 
Marriage & Family Insights 
Principle-Centered Leadership 



\ 



The 

Seven habits 

of HIGHLY 
EFFECTIVE 
PEOPLE 

Restoring the 
Character Ethic 

Stephen R. Covey 



SIMON AND SCHUSTER 

NEW YORK LONDON TORONTO SYDNEY TOKYO SINGAPORE 




Simon and Schuster 

Simon & Schuster Building 
Rockefeller Center 
1230 Avenue of the Americas 
New York, New York 10020 

Copyright © 1989 by Stephen R. Covey 

All rights reserved 

including the right of reproduction 

in whole or in part in any form. 

SIMON AND SCHUSTER and colophon are registered trademarks 
of Simon & Schuster, Inc. 

Designed by Irving Perkins Associates 
Manufactured in the United States of America 

10 9 8 7 6 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 

Covey, Stephen R. 

The seven habits of highly effective people : restoring the 
character ethic I Stephen R. Covey, 
p. cm. 

1. Success — Psychological aspects. 2. Character. I. Title. 
BF637.S8C68 1989 

158—dc20 89-30464 

CIP 

ISBN 0-671-66398-4 

Excerpt of "Little Giddings" from Four Quartets, copyright 1943 
byT.S. Eliot and renewed 1971 by Esme Valerie Eliot, reprinted by 
permission of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc. 



To MY COLLEAGUES, 
EMPOWERED AND 
EMPOWERING 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



Interdependence is a higher value than independence. 

This work is a synergistic product of many minds. It began in the middle 
seventies as I was reviewing 200 years of success literature as part of a 
doctoral program. I am grateful for the inspiration and wisdom of many 
thinkers and for the trans-generational sources and roots of this wisdom. 

I am also grateful for many students, friends, and colleagues at Brigham 
Young University and the Covey Leadership Center and for thousands of 
adults, parents, youth, executives, teachers, and other clients who have 
tested this material and have given feedback and encouragement. The 
material and arrangement has slowly evolved and has imbued those who 
have been sincerely and deeply immersed in it with the conviction that 
the Seven Habits represent a holistic, integrated approach to personal and 
interpersonal effectiveness, and that, more than in the individual habits 
themselves, the real key lies in the relationship among them and in how 
they are sequenced. 

For the development and production of the book itself I feel a deep sense 
of gratitude: 

— to Sandra and to each of our children and their spouses for living lives 
of integrity and service and for supporting my many travels and involve- 
ments outside the home. It's easy to teach principles loved ones live. 

— to my brother John for his constant love, interest, insights and purity of 
soul. 

— to the happy memory of my father. 

— to my mother for her devotion to living descendants and for her more 
than 87 demonstrations of love. 

— to my dear friends and colleagues in the business, especially: 

— to Bill Marre, Ron McMillan, and Lex Watterson for feedback, encour- 
agement, editorial suggestions, and production help. 



10 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

— to Brad Anderson, who at great personal sacrifice for over a year, 
developed a Seven Habits video-based development program. Under his 
leadership this material has been tested and refined and is being 
implemented by thousands of people across a broad range of organiza- 
tions. Almost without exception, after initial exposure to this material, 
our clients desire to make it available to greater numbers of employees, 
underscoring our confidence that it "works." 

— to Bob Thele for helping to create a system for our firm that gave me the 
peace of mind to enable me to really focus on the book. 

— to David Conley for communicating the value and power of the Seven 
Habits to hundreds of business organizations so that my colleagues, 
Blaine Lee, Roice Krueger, Roger Merrill and Al Switzler, and I have the 
constant opportunity to share ideas in a large variety of settings. 

— to my proactive literary agent Jan Miller, and my "can do" associate 
Greg Link and his assistant Stephanni Smith and Raleen Beckham VVahlin 
for their creative and courageous marketing leadership. 

— to my Simon and Schuster editor Bob Asahina for his professional 
competence and project leadership, for his many excellent suggestions 
and for helping me to better understand the difference between writing 
and speaking. 

— to my earlier devoted assistants Shirley and Heather Smith and to my 
present assistant Marilyn Andrews for a level of loyalty which is truly 
uncommon. 

— to our Executive Excellence magazine editor Ken Shelton for his editing 
of the first manuscript years ago, for helping refine and test the material 
in several contexts, and for his integrity and sense of quality. 

— and to Rebecca Merrill for her invaluable editing and production 
assistance, for her inner commitment to the material, and for her skill, 
sensitivity, and carefulness in fulfilling that commitment, and to her 
husband, Roger, for his wise, synergistic help. 



CONTENTS 



Part One: PARADIGMS AND PRINCIPLES 

Inside-Out 15 

The Seven Habits — An Overview 

Part Two: PRIVATE VICTORY 



46 



Habit 1 Be Proactive 65 

Principles of Personal Vision 

Habit 2 Begin with the End in Mind 95 

Principles of Personal Leadership 

Habit 3 Put First Things First 145 

Principles of Personal Management 



Part Three: PUBLIC VICTORY 

Paradigms of Interdependence 



185 



Habit 4 Think Win/Win 204 

Principles of Interpersonal Leadership 
Habit 5 Seek First to Understand, Then to Be 

Understood 235 

Principles of Empathic Communication 
Habit 6 Synergize 261 

Principles of Creative Cooperation 

Part Four: RENEWAL 

Habit 7 Sharpen the Saw 287 

Principles of Balanced Self-Renewal 

Inside-Out Again 309 

Appendix A: Possible Perceptions Flowing out of Various 
Centers 321 

Appendix B: A Quadrant II Day at the Office 331 



13 



63 



183 



285 



11 



Part One 



PARADIGMS 
and PRINCIPLES 



Inside-Out 



There is no real excellence in all this world 
which can be separated from right living. 

David Starr Jordan 



IN more than 25 years of working with people in business, 
university, and marriage and family settings, I have come in 
contact with many individuals who have achieved an incredible 
degree of outward success, but have found themselves struggling 
with an inner hunger, a deep need for personal congruency and 
effectiveness and for healthy, growing relationships with other 
people. 

I suspect some of the problems they have shared with me may be 
familiar to you. 

I've set and met my career goals and I'm having tremendous professional 
success. But it's cost me my personal and family life. I don't know my wife 
and children any more. I'm not even sure I know myself and what's really 
important to me. I've had to ask myself — is it worth it? 

I've started a new diet — for the fifth time this year. I know I'm overweight, 
and I really want to change. I read all the new information, I set goals, I 
get myself all psyched up with a positive mental attitude and tell myself I 
can do it. But I don't. After a few weeks, I fizzle. I just can't seem to keep 
a promise I make to myself. 

I've taken course after course on effective management training. I expect a 
lot out of my employees and I work hard to be friendly toward them and to 
treat them right. But I don't feel any loyalty from them. I think if I were 
home sick for a day, they'd spend most of their time gabbing at the water 
fountain. Why can't I train them to be independent and responsible — or 
find employees who can be? 

15 



16 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

My teenage son is rebellious and on drugs. No matter what I try, he won't 
listen to me. What can I do? 

There's so much to do. And there's never enough time. I feel pressured and 
hassled all day, every day, seven days a week. I've attended time 
management seminars and I've tried half a dozen different planning 
systems. They've helped some, hut I still don't feel I'm living the happy, 
productive, peaceful life I want to live. 

I want to teach my children the value of work. But to get them to do 
anything, I have to supervise every move . . . and put up with complaining 
every step of the way. It's so much easier to do it myself. Why can't 
children do their work cheerfully and without being reminded? 

Vm busy — really busy. But sometimes I wonder if what I'm doing will 
make any difference in the long run. I'd really like to think there was 
meaning in my life, that somehow things were different because I was here. 

I see my friends or relatives achieve some degree of success or receive some 
recognition, and I smile and congratulate them enthusiastically. But 
inside, Ym eating my heart out. Why do I feel this way? 

I have a forceful personality. I know, in almost any interaction, I can 
control the outcome. Most of the time, I can even do it by influencing 
others to come up with the solution I want. I think through each situation 
and I really feel the ideas I come up with are usually the best for everyone. 
But I feel uneasy. I always wonder what other people really think of me and 
my ideas. 

My marriage has gone flat. We don't fight or anything; we just don't love 
each other anymore. We've gone to counseling; we've tried a number of 
things, but we just can't seem to rekindle the feeling we used to have. 

These are deep problems, painful problems — problems that 
quick fix approaches can't solve. 

A fev^^ years ago, my wife Sandra and I v^^ere struggling with this 
kind of concern. One of our sons was having a very difficult time 
in school. He was doing poorly academically; he didn't even know 
how to follow the instructions on the tests, let alone do well on 
them. Socially he was immature, often embarrassing those closest 
to him. Athletically, he was small, skinny, and uncoordinated — 



INSIDE-OUT 17 

swinging his baseball bat, for example, almost before the ball was 
even pitched. Others would laugh at him. 

Sandra and I were consumed with a desire to help him. We felt 
that if "success" were important in any area of life, it was 
supremely important in our role as parents. So we worked on our 
attitudes and behavior toward him and we tried to work on his. We 
attempted to psych him up using positive mental attitude tech- 
niques. "Come on, son! You can do it! We know you can. Put your 
hands a little higher on the bat and keep your eye on the ball. Don't 
swing till it gets close to you." And if he did a little better, we 
would go to great lengths to reinforce him. "That's good, son, keep 
it up." 

When others laughed, we reprimanded them. "Leave him alone. 
Get off his back. He's just learning." And our son would cry and 
insist that he'd never be any good and that he didn't like baseball 
anyway. 

Nothing we did seemed to help, and we were really worried. We 
could see the effect this was having on his self-esteem. We tried to 
be encouraging and helpful and positive, but after repeated failure, 
we finally drew back and tried to look at the situation on a different 
level. 

At this time in my professional role I was involved in leadership 
development work with various clients throughout the country. In 
that capacity I was preparing bimonthly programs on the subject of 
communication and perception for IBM's Executive Development 
Program participants. 

As I researched and prepared these presentations, I became 
particularly interested in how perceptions are formed, how they 
govern the way we see, and how the way we see governs how we 
behave. This led me to a study of expectancy theory and self- 
fulfilling prophecies or the "Pygmalion effect," and to a realization 
of how deeply imbedded our perceptions are. It taught me that we 
must look at the lens through which we see the world, as well as 
at the world we see, and that the lens itself shapes how we 
interpret the world. 

As Sandra and I talked about the concepts I was teaching at 
IBM and about our own situation, we began to realize that what 
we were doing to help our son was not in harmony with the way 
we really saw him. When we honestly examined our deepest 
feelings, we realized that our perception was that he was basically 
inadequate, somehow "behind." No matter how much we 



18 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

worked on our attitude and behavior, our efforts were ineffective 
because, despite our actions and our words, what we really 
communicated to him was, "You aren't capable. You have to be 
protected." 

We began to realize that if we wanted to change the situation, we 
first had to change ourselves. And to change ourselves effectively, 
we first had to change our perceptions. 

The Personality and Character Ethics 

At the same time, in addition to my research on perception, I 
was also deeply immersed in an in-depth study of the success 
literature published in the United States since 1776. I was reading 
or scanning literally hundreds of books, articles, and essays in 
fields such as self-improvement, popular psychology, and self- 
help. At my fingertips was the sum and substance of what a free 
and democratic people considered to be the keys to successful 
living. 

As my study took me back through 200 years of writing about 
success, I noticed a startling pattern emerging in the content of the 
literature. Because of our own pain, and because of similar pain I 
had seen in the lives and relationships of many people I had 
worked with through the years, I began to feel more and more that 
much of the success literature of the past 50 years was superficial. 
It was filled with social image consciousness, techniques and quick 
fixes — with social band-aids and aspirin that addressed acute 
problems and sometimes even appeared to solve them temporarily, 
but left the underlying chronic problems untouched to fester and 
resurface time and again. 

In stark contrast, almost all the literature in the first 150 years or 
so focused on what could be called the Character Ethic as the 
foundation of success — things like integrity, humility, fidelity, 
temperance, courage, justice, patience, industry, simplicity, mod- 
esty, and the Golden Rule. Benjamin Franklin's autobiography is 
representative of that literature. It is, basically, the story of one 
man's effort to integrate certain principles and habits deep within 
his nature. 

The Character Ethic taught that there are basic principles of 
effective living, and that people can only experience true success 
and enduring happiness as they learn and integrate these princi- 
ples into their basic character. 



INSIDE-OUT 19 

But shortly after World War I the basic view of success shifted 
from the Character Ethic to what we might call the Personality 
Ethic. Success became more a function of personality, of public 
image, of attitudes and behaviors, skills and techniques, that 
lubricate the processes of human interaction. This Personality 
Ethic essentially took two paths: one was human and public 
relations techniques, and the other was positive mental attitude 
(PMA). Some of this philosophy was expressed in inspiring and 
sometimes valid maxims such as "Your attitude determines your 
altitude," "Smiling wins more friends than frowning," and 
"Whatever the mind of man can conceive and believe it can 
achieve." 

Other parts of the personality approach were clearly manipula- 
tive, even deceptive, encouraging people to use techniques to get 
other people to like them, or to fake interest in the hobbies of 
others to get out of them what they wanted, or to use the "power 
look," or to intimidate their way through life. 

Some of this literature acknowledged character as an ingredient 
of success, but tended to compartmentalize it rather than recognize 
it as foundational and catalytic. Reference to the Character Ethic 
became mostly lip service; the basic thrust was quick-fix influence 
techniques, power strategies, communication skills, and positive 
attitudes. 

This Personality Ethic, I began to realize, was the subconscious 
source of the solutions Sandra and I were attempting to use with 
our son. As I thought more deeply about the difference between 
the Personality and Character Ethics, I realized that Sandra and I 
had been getting social mileage out of our children's good behavior, 
and, in our eyes, this son simply didn't measure up. Our image of 
ourselves, and our role as good, caring parents was even deeper 
than our image of our son and perhaps influenced it. There was a 
lot more wrapped up in the way we were seeing and handling the 
problem than our concern for our son's welfare. 

As Sandra and I talked, we became painfully aware of the 
powerful influence of our own character and motives and of our 
perception of him. We knew that social comparison motives were 
out of harmony with our deeper values and could lead to condi- 
tional love and eventually to our son's lessened sense of self- 
worth. So we determined to focus our efforts on us — not on our 
techniques, but on our deepest motives and our perception of him. 
Instead of trying to change him, we tried to stand apart — to 



20 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

separate us from him — and to sense his identity, individuality, 
separateness, and worth. 

Through deep thought and the exercise of faith and prayer, we 
began to see our son in terms of his own uniqueness. We saw within 
him layers and layers of potential that would be realized at his own 
pace and speed. We decided to relax and get out of his way and let 
his own personality emerge. We saw our natural role as being to 
affirm, enjoy, and value him. We also conscientiously worked on 
our motives and cultivated internal sources of security so that our 
own feelings of worth were not dependent on our children's 
"acceptable" behavior. 

As we loosened up our old perception of our son and developed 
value-based motives, new feelings began to emerge. We found 
ourselves enjoying him instead of comparing or judging him. We 
stopped trying to clone him in our own image or measure him 
against social expectations. We stopped trying to kindly, positively 
manipulate him into an acceptable social mold. Because we saw 
him as fundamentally adequate and able to cope with life, we 
stopped protecting him against the ridicule of others. 

He had been nurtured on this protection, so he went through 
some withdrawal pains, which he expressed and which we ac- 
cepted, but did not necessarily respond to. "We don't need to 
protect you," was the unspoken message. "You're fundamentally 
okay." 

As the weeks and months passed, he began to feel a quiet 
confidence and affirmed himself. He began to blossom, at his own 
pace and speed. He became outstanding as measured by standard 
social criteria — academically, socially and athletically — at a rapid 
clip, far beyond the so-called natural developmental process. As 
the years passed, he was elected to several student body leadership 
positions, developed into an all-state athlete and started bringing 
home straight A report cards. He developed an engaging and 
guileless personality that has enabled him to relate in nonthreat- 
ening ways to all kinds of people. 

Sandra and I believe that our son's "socially impressive" accom- 
plishments were more a serendipitous expression of the feelings he 
had about himself than merely a response to social reward. This 
was an amazing experience for Sandra and me, and a very 
instructional one in dealing with our other children and in other 
roles as well. It brought to our awareness on a very personal level 
the vital difference between the Personality Ethic and the Character 



INSIDE-OLT 21 

Ethic of success. The Psalmist expressed our conviction well: 
"Search your own heart with all diligence for out of it flow the 
issues of life." 



Primary and Secondary Greatness 

My experience with my son, my study of perception and my 
reading of the success literature coalesced to create one of those 
"Aha!" experiences in life when suddenly things click into place. 1 
was suddenly able to see the powerful impact of the Personality 
Ethic and to clearly understand those subtle, often consciously 
unidentified discrepancies between what 1 knew to be true — some 
things I had been taught many years ago as a child and things that 
were deep in my own inner sense of value — and the quick fix 
philosophies that surrounded me every day. 1 understood at a 
deeper level why, as I had worked through the years with people 
from all walks of life, I had found that the things I was teaching 
and knew to be effective were often at variance with these popular 
voices. 

I am not suggesting that elements of the Personality Ethic — 
personality growth, communication skill training, and education in 
the field of influence strategies and positive thinking — are not 
beneficial, in fact sometimes essential for success. I believ^e thev 
are. But these are secondary, not primary traits. Perhaps, in 
utilizing our human capacity to build on the foundation of gener- 
ations before us, we have inadvertently become so focused on our 
own building that we have forgotten the foundation that holds it 
up; or in reaping for so long where we have not sown, perhaps we 
have forgotten the need to sow. 

If 1 try to use human influence strategies and tactics of how to get 
other people to do what I want, to work better, to be more 
motivated, to like me and each other — while my character is 
fundamentally flawed, marked bv duplicitv and insinceritv — then, 
in the long run, I cannot be successful. My duplicitv will breed 
distrust, and everything I do — even using so-called good human 
relations techniques — will be perceived as manipulative. It simply 
makes no difference how good the rhetoric is or even how good the 
intentions are; if there is Httle or no trust, there is no foundation for 
permanent success. Only basic goodness gives life to technique. 

To focus on technique is like cramming your wav through 
school. You sometimes get by, perhaps even get good grades, but 



11 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

if you don't pay the price day in and day out, you never achieve 
true mastery of the subjects you study or develop an educated 
mind. 

Did you ever consider how ridiculous it would be to try to cram 
on a farm — to forget to plant in the spring, play all summer and 
then cram in the fall to bring in the harvest? The farm is a natural 
system. The price must be paid and the process followed. You 
always reap what you sow; there is no shortcut. 

This principle is also true, ultimately, in human behavior, in 
human relationships. They, too, are natural systems based on the 
law of the harvest. In the short run, in an artificial social system 
such as school, you may be able to get by if you learn how to 
manipulate the man-made rules, to "play the game." In most 
one-shot or short-lived human interactions, you can use the 
Personality Ethic to get by and to make favorable impressions 
through charm and skill and pretending to be interested in other 
people's hobbies. You can pick up quick, easy techniques that may 
work in short-term situations. But secondary traits alone have no 
permanent worth in long-term relationships. Eventually, if there 
isn't deep integrity and fundamental character strength, the chal- 
lenges of life will cause true motives to surface and human 
relationship failure will replace short-term success. 

Many people with secondary greatness — that is, social recogni- 
tion for their talents — lack primary greatness or goodness in their 
character. Sooner or later, you'll see this in every long-term 
relationship they have, whether it is with a business associate, a 
spouse, a friend, or a teenage child going through an identity 
crisis. It is character that communicates most eloquently. As 
Emerson once put it, "What you are shouts so loudly in my ears I 
cannot hear what you say." 

There are, of course, situations where people have character 
strength but they lack communication skills, and that undoubtedly 
affects the quality of relationships as well. But the effects are still 
secondary. 

In the last analysis, what we are communicates far more elo- 
quently than anything we say or do. We all know it. There are 
people we trust absolutely because we know their character. 
Whether they're eloquent or not, whether they have the human 
relations techniques or not, we trust them, and we work success- 
fully with them. 

In the words of William George Jordan, "Into the hands of every 



INSIDE-OUT 23 

individual is given a marvelous power for good or evil — the silent, 
unconscious, unseen influence of his life. This is simply the 
constant radiation of what man really is, not what he pretends to 
be." 



The Power of a Paradigm 

The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People embody many of 
the fundamental principles of human effectiveness. These habits 
are basic; they are primary. They represent the internalization of 
correct principles upon which enduring happiness and success are 
based. 

But before we can really understand these Seven Habits, we 
need to understand our own "paradigms" and how to make a 
"paradigm shift." 

Both the Character Ethic and the Personality Ethic are examples 
of social paradigms. The word paradigm comes from the Greek. It 
was originally a scientific term, and is more commonly used today 
to mean a model, theory, perception, assumption, or frame of 
reference. In the more general sense, it's the way we "see" the 
world — not in terms of our visual sense of sight, but in terms of 
perceiving, understanding, interpreting. 

For our purposes, a simple way to understand paradigms is to 
see them as maps. We all know that "the map is not the territory." 
A map is simply an explanation of certain aspects of the territory. 
That's exactly what a paradigm is. It is a theory, an explanation, or 
model of something else. 

Suppose you wanted to arrive at a specific location in central 
Chicago. A street map of the city would be a great help to you in 
reaching your destination. But suppose you were given the wrong 
map. Through a printing error, the map labeled "Chicago" was 
actually a map of Detroit. Can you imagine the frustration, the 
ineffectiveness of trying to reach your destination? 

You might work on your behavior — you could try harder, be more 
diligent, double your speed. But your efforts would only succeed 
in getting you to the wrong place faster. 

You might work on your attitude — you could think more posi- 
tively. You still wouldn't get to the right place, but perhaps you 
wouldn't care. Your attitude would be so positive, you'd be happy 
wherever you were. 

The point is, you'd still be lost. The fundamental problem has 



24 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

nothing to do with your behavior or your attitude. It has everything 
to do with having a wrong map. 

If you have the right map of Chicago, then diligence becomes 
important, and when you encounter frustrating obstacles along the 
way, then attitude can make a real difference. But the first and most 
important requirement is the accuracy of the map. 

Each of us has many, many maps in our head, which can be 
divided into two main categories: maps of the way things are, or 
realities, and maps of the way things should be, or values. We interpret 
everything we experience through these mental maps. We seldom 
question their accuracy; we're usually even unaware that we have 
them. We simply assume that the way we see things is the way they 
really are or the way they should be. 

And our attitudes and behaviors grow out of those assumptions. 
The way we see things is the source of the way we think and the 
way we act. 

Before going any further, I invite you to have an intellectual and 
emotional experience. Take a few seconds and just look at the 
picture on the following page. 

Now look at the picture on page 26 and carefully describe what 
you see. 

Do you see a woman? How old would you say she is? What does 
she look like? What is she wearing? In what kind of roles do you 
see her? 

You probably would describe the woman in the second picture 
to be about 25 years old — very lovely, rather fashionable with a 
petite nose and a demure presence. If you were a single man you 
might like to take her out. If you were in retailing, you might hire 
her as a fashion model. 

But what if I were to tell you that you're wrong? What if I said 
this picture is of a woman in her 60' s or 70' s who looks sad, has a 
huge nose, and is certainly no model. She's someone you probably 
would help across the street. 

Who's right? Look at the picture again. Can you see the old 
woman? If you can't, keep trying. Can you see her big hook nose? 
Her shawl? 

If you and I were talking face to face, we could discuss the 
picture. You could describe what you see to me, and I could talk to 
you about what I see. We could continue to communicate until you 
clearly showed me what you see in the picture and I clearly 
showed you what I see. 

Because we can't do that, turn to page 45 and study the picture 



INSlDE-OUT 



25 




26 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EITECTIVE PEOPLE 




INSIDE-OUT 27 

there and then look at this picture again. Can you see the old 
woman now? It's important that you see her before you continue 
reading. 

I first encountered this exercise many years ago at the Harvard 
Business School. The instructor was using it to demonstrate clearly 
and eloquently that two people can see the same thing, disagree, 
and yet both be right. It's not logical; its psychological. 

He brought into the room a stack of large cards, half of which 
had the image of the young woman you saw on page 25, and the 
other half of which had the image of the old woman on page 45. 

He passed them out to the class, the picture of the young woman 
to one side of the room and the picture of the old woman to the 
other. He asked us to look at the cards, concentrate on them for 
about ten seconds and then pass them back in. He then projected 
upon the screen the picture you saw on page 26 combining both 
images and asked the class to describe what they saw. Almost 
every person in that class who had first seen the young woman's 
image on a card saw the young woman in the picture. And almost 
every person who had first seen the old woman's image on a card 
saw an old woman in the picture. 

The professor then asked one student to explain what he saw to 
a student on the opposite side of the room. As they talked back and 
forth, communication problems flared up. 

"What do you mean, 'old lady'? She couldn't be more than 20 or 
22 years old!" 

"Oh, come on. You have to be joking. She's 70 — could be 
pushing 80!" 

"What's the matter with you? Are you blind? This lady is young, 
good looking. I'd like to take her out. She's lovely." 

"Lovely? She's an old hag." 

The arguments went back and forth, each person sure of, and 
adamant in, his or her position. All of this occurred in spite of one 
exceedingly important advantage the students had — most of them 
knew early in the demonstration that another point of view did, in 
fact, exist — something many of us would never admit. Neverthe- 
less, at first, only a few students really tried to see this picture from 
another frame of reference. 

After a period of futile communication, one student went up to 
the screen and pointed to a line on the drawing. "There is the 
young woman's necklace." The other one said, "No, that is the old 
woman's mouth." Gradually, they began to calmly discuss specific 
points of difference, and finally one student, and then another. 



28 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

experienced sudden recognition when the images of both came 
into focus. Through continued calm, respectful, and specific com- 
munication, each of us in the room was finally able to see the other 
point of view. But when we looked away and then back, most of us 
would immediately see the image we had been conditioned to see 
in the ten-second period of time. 

I frequently use this perception demonstration in working with 
people and organizations because it yields so many deep insights 
into both personal and interpersonal effectiveness. It shows, first 
of all, how powerfully conditioning affects our perceptions, our 
paradigms. If ten seconds can have that kind of impact on the way 
we see things, what about the conditioning of a lifetime? The 
influences in our lives — family, school, church, work environment, 
friends, associates, and current social paradigms such as the 
Personality Ethic — all have made their silent unconscious impact 
on us and help shape our frame of reference, our paradigms, our 
maps. 

It also shows that these paradigms are the source of our attitudes 
and behaviors. We cannot act with integrity outside of them. We 
simply cannot maintain wholeness if we talk and walk differently 
than we see. If you were among the 90 percent who typically see 
the young woman in the composite picture when conditioned to 
do so, you undoubtedly found it difficult to think in terms of 
having to help her cross the street. Both your attitude about her and 
your behavior toward her had to be congruent with the way you saw 
her. 

This brings into focus one of the basic flaws of the Personality 
Ethic. To try to change outward attitudes and behaviors does very 
little good in the long run if we fail to examine the basic paradigms 
from which those attitudes and behaviors flow. 

This perception demonstration also shows how powerfully our 
paradigms affect the way we interact with other people. As clearly 
and objectively as we think we see things, we begin to realize that 
others see them differently from their own apparently equally clear 
and objective point of view. "Where we stand depends on where 
we sit." 

Each of us tends to think we see things as they are, that we are 
objective. But this is not the case. We see the world, not as it is, but 
as we are — or, as we are conditioned to see it. When we open our 
mouths to describe what we see, we in effect describe ourselves, 
our perceptions, our paradigms. When other people disagree with 



INSIDE-OUT 29 

US, we immediately think something is wrong with them. But, as 
the demonstration shows, sincere, clearheaded people see things 
differently, each looking through the unique lens of experience. 

This does not mean that there are no facts. In the demonstration, 
two individuals who initially have been influenced by different 
conditioning pictures look at the third picture together. They are 
now both looking at the same identical facts — black lines and white 
spaces — and they would both acknowledge these as facts. But each 
person's interpretation of these facts represents prior experiences, 
and the facts have no meaning whatsoever apart from the inter- 
pretation. 

The more aware we are of our basic paradigms, maps, or 
assumptions, and the extent to which we have been influenced by 
our experience, the more we can take responsibility for those 
paradigms, examine them, test them against reality, listen to 
others and be open to their perceptions, thereby getting a larger 
picture and a far more objective view. 

The Power of a Paradigm Shift 

Perhaps the most important insight to be gained from the 
perception demonstration is in the area of paradigm shifting, what 
we might call the "Aha!" experience when someone finally "sees" 
the composite picture in another way. The more bound a person is 
by the initial perception, the more powerful the "Aha!" experience 
is. It's as though a light were suddenly turned on inside. 

The term paradigm shift was introduced by Thomas Kuhn in his 
highly influential landmark book. The Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions. Kuhn shows how almost every significant break- 
through in the field of scientific endeavor is first a break with 
tradition, with old ways of thinking, with old paradigms. 

For Ptolemy, the great Egyptian astronomer, the earth was the 
center of the universe. But Copernicus created a paradigm shift, 
and a great deal of resistance and persecution as well, by placing 
the sun at the center. Suddenly, everything took on a different 
interpretation. 

The Newtonian model of physics was a clockwork paradigm and 
is still the basis of modern engineering. But it was partial, incom- 
plete. The scientific world was revolutionized by the Einsteinian 
paradigm, the relativity paradigm, which had much higher predic- 
tive and explanatory value. 



30 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Until the germ theory was developed, a high percentage of 
women and children died during childbirth, and no one could 
understand why. In military skirmishes, more men were dying 
from small wounds and diseases than from the major traumas on 
the front lines. But as soon as the germ theory was developed, a 
whole new paradigm, a better, improved way of understanding 
what was happening made dramatic, significant medical improve- 
ment possible. 

The United States today is the fruit of a paradigm shift. The 
traditional concept of government for centuries had been a mon- 
archy, the divine right of kings. Then a different paradigm was 
developed — government of the people, by the people, and for the 
people. And a constitutional democracy was born, unleashing 
tremendous human energy and ingenuity, and creating a standard 
of living, of freedom and liberty, of influence and hope unequaled 
in the history of the world. 

Not all paradigm shifts are in positive directions. As we have 
observed, the shift from the Character Ethic to the Personality 
Ethic has drawn us away from the very roots that nourish true 
success and happiness. 

But whether they shift us in positive or negative directions, 
whether they are instantaneous or developmental, paradigm shifts 
move us from one way of seeing the world to another. And those 
shifts create powerful change. Our paradigms, correct or incorrect, 
are the sources of our attitudes and behaviors, and ultimately our 
relationships with others. 

I remember a mini-paradigm shift I experienced one Sunday 
morning on a subway in New York. People were sitting quietly — 
some reading newspapers, some lost in thought, some resting with 
their eyes closed. It was a calm, peaceful scene. 

Then suddenly, a man and his children entered the subway car. 
The children were so loud and rambunctious that instantly the 
whole climate changed. 

The man sat down next to me and closed his eyes, apparently 
oblivious to the situation. The children were yelling back and forth, 
throwing things, even grabbing people's papers. It was very 
disturbing. And yet, the man sitting next to me did nothing. 

It was difficult not to feel irritated. I could not believe that he 
could be so insensitive as to let his children run wild like that and 
do nothing about it, taking no responsibility at all. It was easy to 



INSIDE-OUT 31 

see that everyone else on the subway felt irritated, too. So finally, 
with what I felt was unusual patience and restraint, I turned to him 
and said, "Sir, your children are really disturbing a lot of people. I 
wonder if you couldn't control them a little more?" 

The man lifted his gaze as if to come to a consciousness of the 
situation for the first time and said softly, "Oh, you're right. I guess 
I should do something about it. We just came from the hospital 
where their mother died about an hour ago. I don't know what to 
think, and I guess they don't know how to handle it either." 

Can you imagine what I felt at that moment? My paradigm 
shifted. Suddenly I saw things differently, and because I saw 
differently, I thought differently, I felt differently, I behaved differ- 
ently. My irritation vanished. I didn't have to worry about control- 
ling my attitude or my behavior; my heart was filled with the man's 
pain. Feelings of sympathy and compassion flowed freely. "Your 
wife just died? Oh, I'm so sorry! Can you tell me about it? What can 
I do to help?" Everything changed in an instant. 

Many people experience a similar fundamental shift in thinking 
when they face a life-threatening crisis and suddenly see their 
priorities in a different light, or when they suddenly step into a 
new role, such as that of husband or wife, parent or grandparent, 
manager or leader. 

We could spend weeks, months, even years laboring with the 
Personality Ethic trying to change our attitudes and behaviors and 
not even begin to approach the phenomenon of change that occurs 
spontaneously when we see things differently. 

It becomes obvious that if we want to make relatively minor 
changes in our lives, we can perhaps appropriately focus on our 
attitudes and behaviors. But if we want to make significant, 
quantum change, we need to work on our basic paradigms. 

In the words of Thoreau, "For every thousand hacking at the 
leaves of evil, there is one striking at the root." We can only 
achieve quantum improvements in our lives as we quit hacking at 
the leaves of attitude and behavior and get to work on the root, the 
paradigms from which our attitudes and behaviors flow. 

Seeing and Being 

Of course, not all paradigm shifts are instantaneous. Unlike my 
instant insight on the subway, the paradigm-shifting experience 



32 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Sandra and I had with our son w^as a slow, difficult, and deliberate 
process. The approach we had first taken with him was the 
outgrowth of years of conditioning and experience in the Person- 
ality Ethic. It was the result of deeper paradigms we held about our 
own success as parents as well as the measure of success of our 
children. And it was not until we changed those basic paradigms, 
until we saw things differently, that we were able to create 
quantum change in ourselves and in the situation. 

In order to see our son differently, Sandra and I had to be 
differently. Our new paradigm was created as we invested in the 
growth and development of our own character. 

Paradigms are inseparable from character. Being is seeing in the 
human dimension. And what we see is highly interrelated to what 
we are. We can't go very far to change our seeing without 
simultaneously changing our being, and vice versa. 

Even in my apparently instantaneous paradigm-shifting experi- 
ence that morning on the subway, my change of vision was a result 
of — and limited by — my basic character. 

I'm sure there are people who, even suddenly understanding 
the true situation, would have felt no more than a twinge of regret 
or vague guilt as they continued to sit in embarrassed silence 
beside the grieving, confused man. On the other hand, I am 
equally certain there are people who would have been far more 
sensitive in the first place, who may have recognized that a deeper 
problem existed and reached out to understand and help before I 
did. 

Paradigms are powerful because they create the lens through 
which we see the world. The power of a paradigm shift is the 
essential power of quantum change, whether that shift is an 
instantaneous or a slow and deliberate process. 

The Principle-Centered Paradigm 

The Character Ethic is based on the fundamental idea that there 
are principles that govern human effectiveness — natural laws in the 
human dimension that are just as real, just as unchanging and 
unarguably "there" as laws such as gravity are in the physical 
dimension. 

An idea of the reality — and the impact — of these principles can 
be captured in another paradigm-shifting experience as told by 
Frank Koch in Proceedings, the magazine of the Naval Institute. 



INSIDE-OUT 33 

Two battleships assigned to the training squadron had been at sea 
on maneuvers in heavy weather for several days. I was serving on 
the lead battleship and was on watch on the bridge as night fell. The 
visibility was poor with patchy fog, so the captain remained on the 
bridge keeping an eye on all activities. 

Shortly after dark, the lookout on the wing of the bridge reported, 
"Light, bearing on the starboard bow." 

"Is it steady or moving astern?" the captain called out. 

Lookout replied, "Steady, captain," which meant we were on a 
dangerous collision course with that ship. 

The captain then called to the signalman, "Signal that ship: We 
are on a collision course, advise you change course 20 degrees." 

Back came a signal, "Advisable for you to change course 20 
degrees." 

The captain said, "Send, I'm a captain, change course 20 degrees." 

"I'm a seaman second class," came the reply. "You had better 
change course 20 degrees." 

By that time, the captain was furious. He spat out, "Send, I'm a 
battleship. Change course 20 degrees." 

Back came the flashing light, "I'm a lighthouse." 

We changed course. 

The paradigm shift experienced by the captain — and by us as we 
read this account — puts the situation in a totally different light. We 
can see a reality that is superceded by his limited perception — a 
reahty that is as critical for us to understand in our daily lives as it 
u^as for the captain in the fog. 

Principles are like lighthouses. They are natural lavv^s that cannot 
be broken. As Cecil B. deMille observed of the principles contained 
in his monumental movie. The Ten Commandments, "It is impossible 
for us to break the law. We can only break ourselves against the 
law." 

While individuals may look at their own hves and interactions in 
terms of paradigms or maps emerging out of their experience and 
conditioning, these maps are not the territory. They are a "subjec- 
tive reality," only an attempt to describe the territory. 

The "objective reality," or the territory itself, is composed of 
"hghthouse" principles that govern human growth and 
happiness — natural laws that are woven into the fabric of every 
civilized society throughout history and comprise the roots of 
every family and institution that has endured and prospered. The 
degree to which our mental maps accurately describe the territory 
does not alter its existence. 



34 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

The reality of such principles or natural laws becomes obvious to 
anyone who thinks deeply and examines the cycles of social 
history. These principles surface time and time again, and the 
degree to which people in a society recognize and live in harmony 
with them moves them toward either survival and stability or 
disintegration and destruction. 

The principles I am referring to are not esoteric, mysterious, or 
"religious" ideas. There is not one principle taught in this book 
that is unique to any specific faith or religion, including my own. 
These principles are a part of most every major enduring religion, 
as well as enduring social philosophies and ethical systems. They 
are self-evident and can easily be validated by any individual. It's 
almost as if these principles or natural laws are part of the human 
condition, part of the human consciousness, part of the human 
conscience. They seem to exist in all human beings, regardless of 
social conditioning and loyalty to them, even though they might be 
submerged or numbed by such conditions or disloyalty. 

I am referring, for example, to the principle of fairness, out of 
which our whole concept of equity and justice is developed. Little 
children seem to have an innate sense of the idea of fairness even 
apart from opposite conditioning experiences. There are vast 
differences in how fairness is defined and achieved, but there is 
almost universal awareness of the idea. 

Other examples would include integrity and honesty. They create 
the foundation of trust which is essential to cooperation and 
long-term personal and interpersonal growth. 

Another principle is human dignity. The basic concept in the 
United States Declaration of Independence bespeaks this value or 
principle. "We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men are 
created equal and endowed by their Creator with certain inalien- 
able rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of 
happiness." 

Another principle is service, or the idea of making a contribution. 
Another is quality or excellence. 

There is the principle of potential, the idea that we are embryonic 
and can grow and develop and release more and more potential, 
develop more and more talents. Highly related to potential is the 
principle of growth — the process of releasing potential and devel- 
oping talents, with the accompanying need for principles such as 
patience, nurturance, and encouragement. 

Principles are not practices. A practice is a specific activity or 



INSIDE-OUT 35 

action. A practice that works in one circumstance will not neces- 
sarily work in another, as parents who have tried to raise a second 
child exactly like they did the first can readily attest. 

While practices are situationally specific, principles are deep, 
fundamental truths that have universal application. They apply to 
individuals, to marriages, to families, to private and pubhc organ- 
izations of every kind. When these truths are internalized into 
habits, they empower people to create a wide variety of practices to 
deal with different situations. 

Principles are not values. A gang of thieves can share values, but 
they are in violation of the fundamental principles we're talking 
about. Principles are the territory. Values are maps. When we 
value correct principles, we have truth — a knowledge of things as 
they are. 

Principles are guidelines for human conduct that are proven to 
have enduring, permanent value. They're fundamental. They're 
essentially unarguable because they are self-evident. One way to 
quickly grasp the self-evident nature of principles is to simply 
consider the absurdity of attempting to live an effective life based 
on their opposites. I doubt that anyone would seriously consider 
unfairness, deceit, baseness, uselessness, mediocrity, or degener- 
ation to be a solid foundation for lasting happiness and success. 
Although people may argue about how these principles are defined 
or manifested or achieved, there seems to be an innate conscious- 
ness and awareness that they exist. 

The more closely our maps or paradigms are aligned with these 
principles or natural laws, the more accurate and functional they 
will be. Correct maps will infinitely impact our personal and 
interpersonal effectiveness far more than any amount of effort 
expended on changing our attitudes and behaviors. 

Principles of Growth and Change 

The glitter of the Personality Ethic, the massive appeal, is that 
there is some quick and easy way to achieve quality of life — 
personal effectiveness and rich, deep relationships with other 
people — without going through the natural process of work and 
growth that makes it possible. 

It's symbol without substance. It's the "get rich quick" scheme 
promising "wealth without work." And it might even succeed — 
but the schemer remains. 



36 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

The Personality Ethic is illusory and deceptive. And trying to get 
to high quality results with its techniques and quick fixes is just 
about as effective as trying to get to some place in Chicago using a 
map of Detroit. 

In the w^ords of Erich Fromm, an astute observer of the roots and 
fruits of the Personality Ethic: 

Today we come across an individual who behaves like an autom- 
aton, who does not know or understand himself, and the only 
person that he knows is the person that he is supposed to be, whose 
meaningless chatter has replaced communicative speech, whose 
synthetic smile has replaced genuine laughter, and whose sense of 
dull despair has taken the place of genuine pain. Two statements 
may be said concerning this individual. One is that he suffers from 
defects of spontaneity and individuality which may seem to be 
incurable. At the same time it may be said of him he does not differ 
essentially from the millions of the rest of us who walk upon this 
earth. 

In all of life, there are sequential stages of growth and develop- 
ment. A child learns to turn over, to sit up, to crawl, and then to 
walk and run. Each step is important and each one takes time. No 
step can be skipped. 

This is true in all phases of life, in all areas of development, 
whether it be learning to play the piano or communicate effectively 
with a working associate. It is true with individuals, with mar- 
riages, with families, and with organizations. 

We know and accept this fact or principle of process in the area of 
physical things, but to understand it in emotional areas, in human 
relations, and even in the area of personal character is less common 
and more difficult. And even if we understand it, to accept it and 
to live in harmony with it are even less common and more difficult. 
Consequently, we sometimes look for a shortcut, expecting to be 
able to skip some of these vital steps in order to save time and effort 
and still reap the desired result. 

But what happens when we attempt to shortcut a natural 
process in our growth and development? If you are only an 
average tennis player but decide to play at a higher level in order 
to make a better impression, what will result? Would positive 
thinking alone enable you to compete effectively against a pro- 
fessional? 

What if you were to lead your friends to believe you could play 



INSIDE-OUT ?>7 

the piano at concert hall level while your actual present skill was 
that of a beginner? 

The answers are obvious. It is simply impossible to violate, 
ignore, or shortcut this development process. It is contrary to 
nature, and attempting to seek such a shortcut only results in 
disappointment and frustration. 

On a ten-point scale, if I am at level two in any field, and desire 
to move to level five, I must first take the step toward level three. 
"A thousand-mile journey begins with the first step" and can only 
be taken one step at a time. 

If you don't let a teacher know at what level you are — by asking 
a question, or revealing your ignorance — you will not learn or 
grow. You cannot pretend for long, for you will eventually be 
found out. Admission of ignorance is often the first step in our 
education. Thoreau taught, "How can we remember our igno- 
rance, which our growth requires, when we are using our knowl- 
edge all the time?" 

I recall one occasion when two young women, daughters of a 
friend of mine, came to me tearfully, complaining about their 
father's harshness and lack of understanding. They were afraid to 
open up with their parents for fear of the consequences. And yet 
they desperately needed their parents' love, understanding, and 
guidance. 

I talked with the father and found that he was intellectually 
aware of what was happening. But while he admitted he had a 
temper problem, he refused to take responsibility for it and to 
honestly accept the fact that his emotional development level was 
low. It was more than his pride could swallow to take the first step 
toward change. 

To relate effectively with a wife, a husband, children, friends, or 
working associates, we must learn to listen. And this requires 
emotional strength. Listening involves patience, openness, and 
the desire to understand — highly developed qualities of character. 
It's so much easier to operate from a low emotional level and to 
give high-level advice. 

Our level of development is fairly obvious with tennis or piano 
playing, where it is impossible to pretend. But it is not so obvious 
in the areas of character and emotional development. We can 
"pose" and "put on" for a stranger or an associate. We can 
pretend. And for a while we can get by with it — at least in public. 
We might even deceive ourselves. Yet I believe that most of us 



38 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

know^ the truth of what we really are inside; and I think many of 
those we live with and work with do as well. 

I have seen the consequences of attempting to shortcut this 
natural process of growth often in the business world, where 
executives attempt to "buy" a new culture of improved productiv- 
ity, quality, morale, and customer service with strong speeches, 
smile training, and external interventions, or through mergers, 
acquisitions, and friendly or unfriendly takeovers. But they ignore 
the low-trust climate produced by such manipulations. When 
these methods don't work, they look for other Personality Ethic 
techniques that will — all the time ignoring and violating the natu- 
ral principles and processes on which a high-trust culture is 
based. 

I remember violating this principle myself as a father many years 
ago. One day I returned home to my little girl's third-year birthday 
party to find her in the corner of the front room, defiantly clutching 
all of her presents, unwilling to let the other children play with 
them. The first thing I noticed was several parents in the room 
witnessing this selfish display. I was embarrassed, and doubly so 
because at the time I was teaching university classes in human 
relations. And I knew, or at least felt, the expectation of these 
parents. 

The atmosphere in the room was really charged — the children 
were crowding around my little daughter with their hands out, 
asking to play with the presents they had just given, and my 
daughter was adamantly refusing. I said to myself, "Certainly I 
should teach my daughter to share. The value of sharing is one of 
the most basic things we believe in." 

So I first tried a simple request. "Honey, would you please share 
with your friends the toys they've given you?" 

"No," she replied flatly. 

My second method was to use a little reasoning. "Honey, if you 
learn to share your toys with them when they are at your home, 
then when you go to their homes they will share their toys with 
you." 

Again, the immediate reply was "No!" 

I was becoming a little more embarrassed, for it was evident I 
was having no influence. The third method was bribery. Very 
softly I said, "Honey, if you share, I've got a special surprise for 
you. I'll give you a piece of gum." 



INSIDE-OUT 39 

"I don't want gum!" she exploded. 

Now I was becoming exasperated. For my fourth attempt, I 
resorted to fear and threat. "Unless you share, you will be in real 
trouble!" 

"I don't care!" she cried. "These are my things. I don't have to 
share!" 

Finally, I resorted to force. I merely took some of the toys and 
gave them to the other kids. "Here, kids, play with these." 

Perhaps my daughter needed the experience of possessing the 
things before she could give them. (In fact, unless I possess 
something, can I ever really give it?) She needed me as her father 
to have a higher level of emotional maturity to give her that 
experience. 

But at that moment, I valued the opinion those parents had of 
me more than the growth and development of my child and our 
relationship together. I simply made an initial judgment that I was 
right; she should share, and she was wrong in not doing so. 

Perhaps I superimposed a higher-level expectation on her simply 
because on my own scale I was at a lower level. I was unable or 
unwilling to give patience or understanding, so I expected her to give 
things. In an attempt to compensate for my deficiency, I borrowed 
strength from my position and authority and forced her to do what 
I wanted her to do. 

But borrowing strength builds weakness. It builds weakness in 
the borrower because it reinforces dependence on external factors 
to get things done. It builds weakness in the person forced to 
acquiesce, stunting the development of independent reasoning, 
growth, and internal discipline. And finally, it builds weakness in 
the relationship. Fear replaces cooperation, and both people in- 
volved become more arbitrary and defensive. 

And what happens when the source of borrowed strength — be it 
superior size or physical strength, position, authority, credentials, 
status symbols, appearance, or past achievements — changes or is 
no longer there? 

Had I been more mature, I could have relied on my own intrinsic 
strength — my understanding of sharing and of growth and my 
capacity to love and nurture — and allowed my daughter to make a 
free choice as to whether she wanted to share or not to share. 
Perhaps after attempting to reason with her, I could have turned 
the attention of the children to an interesting game, taking all that 
emotional pressure off my child. I've learned that once children 



40 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

gain a sense of real possession, they share very naturally, freely, 
and spontaneously. 

My experience has been that there are times to teach and times 
not to teach. When relationships are strained and the air charged 
with emotion, an attempt to teach is often perceived as a form of 
judgment and rejection. But to take the child alone, quietly, when 
the relationship is good and to discuss the teaching or the value 
seems to have much greater impact. It may have been that the 
emotional maturity to do that was beyond my level of patience and 
internal control at the time. 

Perhaps a sense of possessing needs to come before a sense of 
genuine sharing. Many people who give mechanically or refuse to 
give and share in their marriages and families may never have 
experienced what it means to possess themselves, their own sense 
of identity and self- worth. Really helping our children grow may 
involve being patient enough to allow them the sense of possession 
as well as being wise enough to teach them the value of giving and 
providing the example ourselves. 

The Way We See the Problem Is the Problem 

People are intrigued when they see good things happening in 
the lives of individuals, families, and organizations that are based 
on solid principles. They admire such personal strength and 
maturity, such family unity and teamwork, such adaptive syner- 
gistic organizational culture. 

And their immediate request is very revealing of their basic 
paradigm. "How do you do it? Teach me the techniques." What 
they're really saying is, "Give me some quick fix advice or solution 
that will relieve the pain in my own situation." 

They will find people who will meet their wants and teach these 
things; and for a short time, skills and techniques may appear to 
work. They may eliminate some of the cosmetic or acute problems 
through social aspirin and band-aids. 

But the underlying chronic condition remains, and eventually 
new acute symptoms will appear. The more people are into quick 
fix and focus on the acute problems and pain, the more that very 
approach contributes to the underlying chronic condition. 

The way we see the problem is the problem. 

Look again at some of the concerns that introduced this chapter, 
and at the impact of Personality Ethic thinking. 



INSIDE-OUT 41 

I've taken course after course on effective management training. I expect a 
lot out of my employees and I work hard to be friendly toward them and to 
treat them right. But I don't feel any loyalty from them. I think if 1 were 
home sick for a day, they'd spend most of their time gabbing at the water 
fountain. Why can't I train them to be independent and responsible — or 
find employees who can be? 

The Personality Ethic tells me I could take some kind of dramatic 
action — shake things up, make heads roll — that would make my 
employees shape up and appreciate what they have. Or that I 
could find some motivational training program that would get 
them committed. Or even that I could hire new people that would 
do a better job. 

But is it possible that under that apparently disloyal behavior, 
these employees question whether I really act in their best interest? 
Do they feel like I'm treating them as mechanical objects? Is there 
some truth to that? 

Deep inside, is that really the way I see them? Is there a chance 
the way I look at the people who work for me is part of the 
problem? 

There's so much to do. And there's never enough time. I feel pressured and 
hassled all day, every day, seven days a week. I've attended time 
management seminars and I've tried half a dozen different planning 
systems. They've helped some, but I still don't feel Vm living the happy, 
productive, peaceful life I want to live. 

The Personality Ethic tells me there must be something out 
there — some new planner or seminar that will help me handle all 
these pressures in a more efficient way. 

But is there a chance that efficiency is not the answer? Is getting 
more things done in less time going to make a difference — or will 
it just increase the pace at which I react to the people and 
circumstances that seem to control my life? 

Could there be something I need to see in a deeper, more 
fundamental way — some paradigm within myself that affects the 
way I see my time, my life, and my own nature? 

My marriage has gone flat. We don't fight or anything; we just don't love 
each other anymore. We've gone to counseling; we've tried a number of 
things, but we just can't seem to rekindle the feeling we used to have. 



42 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

The Personality Ethic tells me there must be some new book or 
some seminar where people get all their feelings out that would 
help my wife understand me better. Or maybe that it's useless, and 
only a new relationship will provide the love I need. 

But is it possible that my spouse isn't the real problem? Could I 
be empowering my spouse's weaknesses and making my life a 
function of the way I'm treated? 

Do I have some basic paradigm about my spouse, about mar- 
riage, about what love really is, that is feeding the problem? 

Can you see how fundamentally the paradigms of the Person- 
ality Ethic affect the very way we see our problems as well as the 
way we attempt to solve them? 

Whether people see it or not, many are becoming disillusioned 
with the empty promises of the Personality Ethic. As I travel 
around the country and work with organizations, I find that 
long-term thinking executives are simply turned off by psych up 
psychology and "motivational" speakers who have nothing more 
to share than entertaining stories mingled with platitudes. 

They want substance; they want process. They want more than 
aspirin and band-aids. They want to solve the chronic underlying 
problems and focus on the principles that bring long-term results. 

A New Level of Thinking 

Albert Einstein observed, "The significant problems we face 
cannot be solved at the same level of thinking we were at when we 
created them." 

As we look around us and within us and recognize the problems 
created as we live and interact within the Personality Ethic, we 
begin to realize that these are deep, fundamental problems that 
cannot be solved on the superficial level on which they were 
created. 

We need a new level, a deeper level of thinking — a paradigm 
based on the principles that accurately describe the territory of 
effective human being and interacting — to solve these deep con- 
cerns. 

This new level of thinking is what Seven Habits of Highly Effective 
People is about. It's a principle-centered, character-based, "inside- 
out" approach to personal and interpersonal effectiveness. 

"Inside-out" means to start first with self; even more fundamen- 



INSIDE-OUT 43 

tally, to start with the most inside part of self — with your para- 
digms, your character, and your motives. 

It says if you want to have a happy marriage, be the kind of 
person who generates positive energy and sidesteps negative 
energy rather than empowering it. If you want to have a more 
pleasant, cooperative teenager, be a more understanding, em- 
pathic, consistent, loving parent. If you want to have more freedom, 
more latitude in your job, be a more responsible, a more helpful, a 
more contributing employee. If you want to be trusted, be trust- 
worthy. If you want the secondary greatness of recognized talent, 
focus first on primary greatness of character. 

The inside-out approach says that private victories precede 
public victories, that making and keeping promises to ourselves 
precedes making and keeping promises to others. It says it is futile 
to put personality ahead of character, to try to improve relation- 
ships with others before improving ourselves. 

Inside-out is a process — a continuing process of renewal based 
on the natural laws that govern human growth and progress. It's 
an upward spiral of growth that leads to progressively higher 
forms of responsible independence and effective interdependence. 

I have had the opportunity to work with many people — 
wonderful people, talented people, people who deeply want to 
achieve happiness and success, people who are searching, people 
who are hurting. I've worked with business executives, college 
students, church and civic groups, families and marriage partners. 
And in all of my experience, I have never seen lasting solutions to 
problems, lasting happiness and success, that came from the 
outside in. 

What I have seen result from the outside-in paradigm is unhappy 
people who feel victimized and immobilized, who focus on the 
weaknesses of other people and the circumstances they feel are 
responsible for their own stagnant situation. I've seen unhappy 
marriages where each spouse wants the other to change, where 
each is confessing the other's "sins," where each is trying to shape 
up the other. I've seen labor management disputes where people 
spend tremendous amounts of time and energy trying to create 
legislation that would force people to act as though the foundation 
of trust were really there. 

Members of our family have lived in three of the "hottest" spots 
on earth — South Africa, Israel, and Ireland — and I believe the 
source of the continuing problems in each of these places has been 



44 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

the dominant social paradigm of outside-in. Each involved group is 
convinced the problem is "out there" and if "they" (meaning 
others) would "shape up" or suddenly "ship out" of existence, the 
problem v^ould be solved. 

Inside-out is a dramatic paradigm shift for most people, largely 
because of the powerful impact of conditioning and the current 
social paradigm of the Personahty Ethic. 

But from my own experience — both personal and in working 
with thousands of other people — and from careful examination of 
successful individuals and societies throughout history, I am 
persuaded that many of the principles embodied in the Seven 
Habits are already deep within us, in our conscience and our 
common sense. To recognize and develop them and to use them in 
meeting our deepest concerns, we need to think differently, to shift 
our paradigms to a new, deeper, "inside-out" level. 

As we sincerely seek to understand and integrate these princi- 
ples into our lives, I am convinced we will discover and rediscover 
the truth of T. S. Eliot's observation: 

We must not cease from exploration and the end of all our exploring will be 
to arrive where we began and to know the place for the first time. 



INSIDE-OUT 45 




The Seven Habits- 
An Overview 



We are what we repeatedly do. 
Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit. 

Aristotle 



OUR CHARACTER, BASICALLY, is a composite of our habits. "Sow a 
thought, reap an action; sow an action, reap a habit; sow a 
habit, reap a character; sow a character, reap a destiny," the maxim 
goes. 

Habits are powerful factors in our lives. Because they are 
consistent, often unconscious patterns, they constantly, daily, 
express our character and produce our effectiveness ... or inef- 
fectiveness. 

As Horace Mann, the great educator, once said, "Habits are like 
a cable. We weave a strand of it everyday and soon it cannot be 
broken." I personally do not agree with the last part of his 
expression. I know they can be broken. Habits can be learned and 
unlearned. But I also know it isn't a quick fix. It involves a process 
and a tremendous commitment. 

Those of us who watched the lunar voyage of Apollo 11 were 
transfixed as we saw the first men walk on the moon and return to 
earth. Superlatives such as "fantastic" and "incredible" were 
inadequate to describe those eventful days. But to get there, those 
astronauts hterally had to break out of the tremendous gravity pull 
of the earth. More energy was spent in the first few minutes of 
lift-off, in the first few miles of travel, than was used over the next 
several days to travel half a million miles. 

Habits, too, have tremendous gravity pull — more than most 
people realize or would admit. Breaking deeply imbedded habitual 
tendencies such as procrastination, impatience, criticalness, or 

46 



THE SEVEN HABITS — AN OVERVIEW A7 

selfishness that violate basic principles of human effectiveness 
involves more than a little v^illpower and a few minor changes in 
our lives. "Lift off" takes a tremendous effort, but once we break 
out of the gravity pull, our freedom takes on a whole new 
dimension. 

Like any natural force, gravity pull can work with us or against 
us. The gravity pull of some of our habits may currently be keeping 
us from going where we want to go. But it is also gravity pull that 
keeps our world together, that keeps the planets in their orbits and 
our universe in order. It is a powerful force, and if we use it 
effectively, we can use the gravity pull of habit to create the 
cohesiveness and order necessary to establish effectiveness in our 
lives. 

"Habits" Defined 

For our purposes, we will define a habit as the intersection of 
knowledge, skill, and desire. 

Knowledge is the theoretical paradigm, the what to do and the 
why. Skill is the how to do. And desire is the motivation, the want to 
do. In order to make something a habit in our lives, we have to 
have all three. 

I may be ineffective in my interactions with my work associates, 
my spouse, or my children because I constantly tell them what I 
think, but I never really listen to them. Unless I search out correct 
principles of human interaction, I may not even know I need to 
listen. 

Even if I do know that in order to interact effectively with others 
I really need to listen to them, I may not have the skill. I may not 
know how to really listen deeply to another human being. 

But knowing I need to listen and knowing how to listen is not 
enough. Unless I want to listen, unless I have the desire, it won't be 
a habit in my life. Creating a habit requires work in all three 
dimensions. 

The being/seeing change is an upward process — being changing 
seeing, which in turn changes being, and so forth, as we move in 
an upward spiral of growth. By working on knowledge, skill, and 
desire, we can break through to new levels of personal and 
interpersonal effectiveness as we break with old paradigms that 
may have been a source of pseudo-security for years. 

It's sometimes a painful process. It's a change that has to be 



48 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 




EFFECTIVE HABITS 

Internalized principles and patterns of behavior 



motivated by a higher purpose, by the willingness to subordinate 
what you think you want now for what you want later. But this 
process produces happiness, "the object and design of our exist- 
ence." Happiness can be defined, in part at least, as the fruit of the 
desire and ability to sacrifice what we want now for what we want 
eventually. 

The Maturity Continuum 

The Seven Habits are not a set of separate or piecemeal psych-up 
formulas. In harmony with the natural laws of growth, they 
provide an incremental, sequential, highly integrated approach to 



THE SEVEN HABITS AN OVERVIEW 49 

the development of personal and interpersonal effectiveness. They 
move us progressively on a Maturity Continuum from dependence 
to independence to interdependence. 

We each begin life as an infant, totally dependent on others. We 
are directed, nurtured, and sustained by others. Without this 
nurturing, we would only live for a few hours or a few days at the 
most. 

Then gradually, over the ensuing months and years, we become 
more and more independent — physically, mentally, emotionally, 
and financially — until eventually we can essentially take care of 
ourselves, becoming inner-directed and self-reliant. 

As we continue to grow and mature, we become increasingly 
aware that all of nature is interdependent, that there is an ecological 
system that governs nature, including society. We further discover 
that the higher reaches of our nature have to do with our 
relationships with others — that human life also is interdependent. 

Our growth from infancy to adulthood is in accordance with 
natural law. And there are many dimensions to growth. Reaching 
our full physical maturity, for example, does not necessarily assure 
us of simultaneous emotional or mental maturity. On the other 
hand, a person's physical dependence does not mean that he or 
she is mentally or emotionally immature. 

On the maturity continuum, dependence is the paradigm of 
you — you take care of me; you come through for me; you didn't 
come through; I blame you for the results. 

Independence is the paradigm of / — 7 can do it; / am responsible; / 
am self-reliant; / can choose. 

Interdependence is the paradigm of we — we can do it; we can 
cooperate; we can combine our talents and abilities and create 
something greater together. 

Dependent people need others to get what they want. Indepen- 
dent people can get what they want through their own effort. 
Interdependent people combine their own efforts with the efforts 
of others to achieve their greatest success. 

If I were physically dependent — paralyzed or disabled or limited 
in some physical way — I would need you to help me. If I were 
emotionally dependent, my sense of worth and security would 
come from your opinion of me. If you didn't like me, it could be 
devastating. If I were intellectually dependent, I would count on 
you to do my thinking for me, to think through the issues and 
problems of my life. 



50 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

If I were independent, physically, I could pretty well make it on 
my own. Mentally, I could think my own thoughts, I could move 
from one level of abstraction to another. I could think creatively 
and analytically and organize and express my thoughts in under- 
standable ways. Emotionally, I would be validated from within. I 
would be inner directed. My sense of worth would not be a 
function of being liked or treated well. 

It's easy to see that independence is much more mature than 
dependence. Independence is a major achievement in and of itself. 
But independence is not supreme. 

Nevertheless, the current social paradigm enthrones indepen- 
dence. It is the avowed goal of many individuals and social 
movements. Most of the self-improvement material puts indepen- 
dence on a pedestal, as though communication, teamwork, and 
cooperation were lesser values. 

But much of our current emphasis on independence is a reaction 
to dependence — to having others control us, define us, use us, and 
manipulate us. 

The little understood concept of interdependence appears to 
many to smack of dependence, and therefore, we find people, 
often for selfish reasons, leaving their marriages, abandoning their 
children, and forsaking all kinds of social responsibility — all in the 
name of independence. 

The kind of reaction that results in people "throwing off their 
shackles," becoming "liberated," "asserting themselves," and 
"doing their own thing" often reveals more fundamental depen- 
dencies that cannot be run away from because they are internal 
rather than external — dependencies such as letting the weaknesses 
of other people ruin our emotional lives or feeling victimized by 
people and events out of our control. 

Of course, we may need to change our circumstances. But the 
dependence problem is a personal maturity issue that has little to 
do with circumstances. Even with better circumstances, immaturity 
and dependence often persist. 

True independence of character empowers us to act rather than 
be acted upon. It frees us from our dependence on circumstances 
and other people and is a worthy, liberating goal. But it is not the 
ultimate goal in effective living. 

Independent thinking alone is not suited to interdependent 
reality. Independent people who do not have the maturity to think 
and act interdependently may be good individual producers, but 



THE SEVEN HABITS — AN OVERVIEW 51 

they w^on't be good leaders or team players. They're not coming 
from the paradigm of interdependence necessary to succeed in 
marriage, family, or organizational reality. 

Life is, by nature, highly interdependent. To try to achieve 
maximum effectiveness through independence is like trying to play 
tennis with a golf club — the tool is not suited to the reality. 

Interdependence is a far more mature, more advanced concept. 
If I am physically interdependent, I am self-reliant and capable, but 
I also realize that you and I working together can accomplish far 
more than, even at my best, I could accomphsh alone. If I am 
emotionally interdependent, I derive a great sense of worth within 
myself, but I also recognize the need for love, for giving, and for 
receiving love from others. If I am intellectually interdependent, I 
realize that I need the best thinking of other people to join with my 
own. 

As an interdependent person, I have the opportunity to share 
myself deeply, meaningfully, with others, and I have access to the 
vast resources and potential of other human beings. 

Interdependence is a choice only independent people can make. 
Dependent people cannot choose to become interdependent. They 
don't have the character to do it; they don't own enough of 
themselves. 

That's why Habits 1, 2, and 3 in the following chapters deal with 
self-mastery. They move a person from dependence to indepen- 
dence. They are the "Private Victories," the essence of character 
growth. Private victories precede public victories. You can't invert that 
process anymore than you can harvest a crop before you plant it. 
It's inside-out. 

As you become truly independent, you have the foundation for 
effective interdependence. You have the character base from which 
you can effectively work on the more personality-oriented "Public 
Victories" of teamwork, cooperation, and communication in Habits 
4, 5, and 6. 

That does not mean you have to be perfect in Habits 1, 2, and 3 
before working on Habits 4, 5, and 6. Understanding the sequence 
will help you manage your growth more effectively, but I'm not 
suggesting that you put yourself in isolation for several years until 
you fully develop Habits 1, 2, and 3. 

As part of an interdependent world, you have to relate to that 
world every day. But the acute problems of that world can easily 
obscure the chronic character causes. Understanding how what 



52 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

you are impacts every interdependent interaction will help you to 
focus your efforts sequentially, in harmony with the natural laws of 
growth. 

Habit 7 is the habit of renewal — a regular, balanced renewal of 
the four basic dimensions of life. It circles and embodies all the 
other habits. It is the habit of continuous improvement that creates 
the upward spiral of growth that lifts you to new levels of 
understanding and living each of the habits as you come around to 
them on a progressively higher plane.* 

The diagram on the next page is a visual representation of the 
sequence and the interdependence of the Seven Habits, and will be 
used throughout this book as we explore both the sequential 
relationship between the habits and also their synergy — how, in 
relating to each other, they create bold new forms of each other 
that add even more to their value. Each concept or habit will be 
highlighted as it is introduced. 

Effectiveness Defined 

The Seven Habits are habits of effectiveness. Because they are 
based on principles, they bring the maximum long-term beneficial 
results possible. They become the basis of a person's character, 
creating an empowering center of correct maps from which an 
individual can effectively solve problems, maximize opportunities, 
and continually learn and integrate other principles in an upward 
spiral of growth. 

They are also habits of effectiveness because they are based on a 
paradigm of effectiveness that is in harmony with a natural law, a 
principle I call the "P/PC Balance," which many people break 
themselves against. This principle can be easily understood by 
remembering Aesop's fable of the goose and the golden egg. 

This fable is the story of a poor farmer who one day discovers in 
the nest of his pet goose a glittering golden egg. At first, he thinks 
it must be some kind of trick. But as he starts to throw the egg 
aside, he has second thoughts and takes it in to be appraised 
instead. 

The egg is pure gold! The farmer can't believe his good fortune. 
He becomes even more incredulous the following day when the 
experience is repeated. Day after day, he awakens to rush to the 



If you would like to receive a complimentary self-scoring Seven Habits Personal Feedback 
Profile to help you evaluate your current level of effectiveness, please call: 1-800-255-0777. 



THE SEVEN HABITS AN OVERVIEW 



53 



Interdependence 



jk First to Understani 
. Then to be 
Understood .p^BLIC 

5 y VICTORY 




Independence 




3 

Put First 
Things First 



1 \ PRIVATE 
sVICTORY, 

Be N. y^ Begin with 

Proactive \ / the End in Mind 



Dependence 



THE SEVEN HABITS PARADIGM 



54 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

nest and find another golden egg. He becomes fabulously wealthy; 
it all seems too good to be true. 

But with his increasing wealth comes greed and impatience. 
Unable to wait day after day for the golden eggs, the farmer 
decides he will kill the goose and get them all at once. But when he 
opens the goose, he finds it empty. There are no golden eggs — and 
now there is no way to get any more. The farmer has destroyed the 
goose that produced them. 

I suggest that within this fable is a natural law, a principle — the 
basic definition of effectiveness. Most people see effectiveness 
from the golden egg paradigm: the more you produce, the more 
you do, the more effective you are. 

But as the story shows, true effectiveness is a function of two 
things: what is produced (the golden eggs) and the producing asset 
or capacity to produce (the goose). 

If you adopt a pattern of life that focuses on golden eggs and 
neglects the goose, you will soon be without the asset that 
produces golden eggs. On the other hand, if you only take care of 
the goose with no aim toward the golden eggs, you soon won't 
have the wherewithal to feed yourself or the goose. 

Effectiveness lies in the balance — what I call the P/PC Balance. P 
stands for production of desired results, the golden eggs. PC stands 
for production capability, the ability or asset that produces the golden 
eggs. 

Three Kinds of Assets 

Basically, there are three kinds of assets: physical, financial, and 
human. Let's look at each one in turn. 

A few years ago, I purchased a physical asset — a power lawn- 
mower. I used it over and over again without doing anything to 
maintain it. The mower worked well for two seasons, but then it 
began to break down. When I tried to revive it with service and 
sharpening, I discovered the engine had lost over half its original 
power capacity. It was essentially worthless. 

Had I invested in PC — in preserving and maintaining the asset — 
I would still be enjoying its P — the mowed lawn. As it was, I had 
to spend far more time and money replacing the mower than I ever 
would have spent, had I maintained it. It simply wasn't effective. 

In our quest for short-term returns, or results, we often ruin a 
prized physical asset — a car, a computer, a washer or dryer, even 



THE SEVEN HABITS — AN OVERVIEW 55 

our body or our environment. Keeping P and PC in balance makes 
a tremendous difference in the effective use of physical assets. 

It also powerfully impacts the effective use of financial assets. 
How often do people confuse principal with interest? Have you 
ever invaded principal to increase your standard of living, to get 
more golden eggs? The decreasing principal has decreasing power 
to produce interest or income. And the dwindling capital becomes 
smaller and smaller until it no longer supplies even basic needs. 

Our most important financial asset is our own capacity to earn. 
If we don't continually invest in improving our own PC, we 
severely limit our options. We're locked into our present situation, 
running scared of our corporation or our boss's opinion of us, 
economically dependent and defensive. Again, it simply isn't 
effective. 

In the human area, the P/PC Balance is equally fundamental, but 
even more important, because people control physical and financial 
assets. 

When two people in a marriage are more concerned about 
getting the golden eggs, the benefits, than they are in preserving 
the relationship that makes them possible, they often become 
insensitive and inconsiderate, neglecting the little kindnesses and 
courtesies so important to a deep relationship. They begin to use 
control levers to manipulate each other, to focus on their own 
needs, to justify their own position and look for evidence to show 
the wrongness of the other person. The love, the richness, the 
softness and spontaneity begin to deteriorate. The goose gets 
sicker day by day. 

And what about a parent's relationship with a child? When 
children are little, they are very dependent, very vulnerable. It 
becomes so easy to neglect the PC work — the training, the com- 
municating, the relating, the listening. It's easy to take advantage, 
to manipulate, to get what you want the way you want it — right 
now! You're bigger, you're smarter, and you're right! So why not 
just tell them what to do? If necessary, yell at them, intimidate 
them, insist on your way. 

Or you can indulge them. You can go for the golden egg of 
popularity, of pleasing them, giving them their way all the time. 
Then they grow up without any internal sense of standards or 
expectations, without a personal commitment to being disciplined 
or responsible. 

Either way — authoritarian or permissive — you have the golden 



56 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

egg mentality. You want to have your way or you want to be liked. 
But what happens, meantime, to the goose? What sense of 
responsibility, of self-discipline, of confidence in the ability to 
make good choices or achieve important goals is a child going to 
have a few years down the road? And what about your relation- 
ship? When he reaches those critical teenage years, the identity 
crises, will he know from his experience with you that you will 
listen without judging, that you really, deeply care about him as a 
person, that you can be trusted, no matter what? Will the relation- 
ship be strong enough for you to reach him, to communicate with 
him, to influence him? 

Suppose you want your daughter to have a clean room — that's 
P, production, the golden egg. And suppose you want her to clean 
it — that's PC, production capability. Your daughter is the goose, 
the asset, that produces the golden egg. 

If you have P and PC in balance, she cleans the room cheerfully, 
without being reminded, because she is committed and has the 
discipline to stay with the commitment. She is a valuable asset, a 
goose that can produce golden eggs. 

But if your paradigm is focused on production, on getting the 
room clean, you might find yourself nagging her to do it. You 
might even escalate your efforts to threatening or yelling, and in 
your desire to get the golden egg, you undermine the health and 
welfare of the goose. 

Let me share with you an interesting PC experience I had with 
one of my daughters. We were planning a private date, which is 
something I enjoy regularly with each of my children. We find that 
the anticipation of the date is as satisfying as the realization. 

So I approached my daughter and said, 'Honey, tonight's your 
night. What do you want to do?" 

"Oh, Dad, that's okay," she replied. 

"No, really," I said. "What would you like to do?" 

"Well," she finally said, "what I want to do, you don't really 
want to do." 

"Really, honey," I said earnestly, "I want to do it. No matter 
what, it's your choice." 

"I want to go see Star Wars," she replied. "But I know you don't 
like Star Wars. You slept through it before. You don't like these 
fantasy movies. That's okay. Dad." 

"No, honey, if that's what you'd like to do, I'd like to do it." 



THE SEVEN HABITS AN OVERVIEW 57 

"Dad, don't w^orry about it. We don't always have to have this 
date." She paused and then added, "But you know why you don't 
like Star Wars? It's because you don't understand the philosophy 
and training of a Jedi Knight." 

"What?" 

"You know the things you teach. Dad? Those are the same 
things that go into the training of a Jedi Knight." 

"Really? Let's go to Star Wars!" 

And we did. She sat next to me and gave me the paradigm. I 
became her student, her learner. It was totally fascinating. I could 
begin to see out of a new paradigm the whole way a Jedi Knight's 
basic philosophy in training is manifested in different circum- 
stances. 

That experience was not a planned P experience; it was the 
serendipitous fruit of a PC investment. It was bonding and very 
satisfying. But we enjoyed golden eggs, too, as the goose — the 
quality of the relationship — was significantly fed. 

Organizational PC 

One of the immensely valuable aspects of any correct principle is 
that it is valid and applicable in a wide variety of circumstances. 
Throughout this book, I would like to share with you some of the 
ways in which these principles apply to organizations, including 
families, as well as to individuals. 

When people fail to respect the P/PC Balance in their use of 
physical assets in organizations, they decrease organizational 
effectiveness and often leave others with dying geese. 

For example, a person in charge of a physical asset, such as a 
machine, may be eager to make a good impression on his superiors. 
Perhaps the company is in a rapid growth stage and promotions 
are coming fast. So he produces at optimum levels — no downtime, 
no maintenance. He runs the machine day and night. The produc- 
tion is phenomenal, costs are down, and profits skyrocket. Within 
a short time, he's promoted. Golden eggs! 

But suppose you are his successor on the job. You inherit a very 
sick goose, a machine that, by this time, is rusted and starts to 
break down. You have to invest heavily in downtime and main- 
tenance. Costs skyrocket; profits nose-dive. And who gets blamed 
for the loss of golden eggs? You do. Your predecessor liquidated 
the asset, but the accounting system only reported unit production, 
costs, and profit. 





fficir tfuit/ and lo$t Ihe atccl <i^ CMiOMer lo^oibr. That «a» no 
mow $0Oi« to pmdacir die ^oidcfi ^g^ 

Inm cofnpKlin^ lyyort 0i6 pto^^€ tfisit dcsil wi^^ 
the emfioyeet. The PC pnodfile i» Id jiaH|i» Inoit 
exacth^ a§ you want ihem io trett yottr kttt cmstmmen. 

You am bay a peaoaCt fund, but yoa can't Innr las heart. Hs 
heait ii where htf endutfiaflii^ his lofalty^ is. Yoo cai bar Ik fa^^ 
bill you caif t boy his bnun. Thaf s wheie his aejli t Hw is, his 
mptnuity, hts lesourceftilnestf, 

PC w(^ is treating employees as v o i unle e i s fast as vck: :rr=: 
customers a» vokmteen, because thafs what the\' are ~-r 
volunteer the best part — their hearts and minds. 

( wa*> m a group once where someone asked, "How do you 

shaptfr up lazy and incompetent employees?" One man responded, 

"\)r()p h;jnd j^renades!" Se\'eral others dieered that kind of madio 
uMiUiA'^i'jTM'Ui talk, that "shape up or ship out" supervision ap- 
proach. 

But another perscjn in the group asked, "^Nlio picks ur r-e 
piece!*?" 

"No pieces/' 

"Well, why don't you do that to your customers?" the other man 
rcpWcA. "just say, 'Listen, if you're not interested in bming, you 
can just ship out of this place.' " 

He said, "You can't do that to customers." 

"VVeJI, how come you can do it to employees?" 

"f3ecause they're in your employ." 

"i see. Are your employees devoted to you? Do they work hard? 
Mow's the turnover?" 

"Are you kidding? You can't find good people these days. 



THE SevgN HAl$ft>— AN V.>VttKVl^cW 5J* 

here's too much turnover, absentet?i^m, nioonU^Utuv^ lVv>^»U" 
I St don't care anyinore." 

That focus on golden egg;? — that attitude, that ^\uad»^;u\ is 
)tally inadequate to tap into the powertul energies ot the n\u\d 
nd heart of another person. A short-term botton\ luie is important, 
ut it isn't all-important. 

Effectiveness lies in the balance. Excessive tocus on V results m 
uined health, worn-out machines, depleted l\iiik .u\vnint>. .nul 
Token relationships. Too much focus on I\' is like a person vvhi> 
uns three or four hours a dav, bragging about the extra ten years 
)f life it creates, unaware he's spending them running. Or a pers(»n 
'ndlessly going to school, never producing, IiMnr, oi\ o\\\ri pt-c) 
^le's golden eggs — the eternal student syndrome 

To maintain the P/PC Balance, the balance between the gi)KU"n 
fgg (production) and the health and welfare of the goose (proiluc- 
don capability) is often a difficult judgment call. Mut I suggest it is 
the very essence of effectiveness. It bal.mces short tt-rni with long 
term. It balances going for the grade aiul p«iying the pru c to y,r\ an 
education. It balances the desire to have a room clean .mtl ili*- 
building of a relationship in which the child is internally ( ommilted 
to do it — cheerfully, willingly, without external supervision. 

It's a principle you can see validated in your own lite when you 
burn the candle at both ends to get more golden eggs and wind up 
sick or exhausted, unable to produce any at all; or whrn you get ,i 
good night's sleep and wake up ready to produce throughout the 
day. 

You can see it when you press to get your own way with 
someone and somehow feel an emptiness in the relationship, or 
when you really take time to invest in a relationship and you find 
the desire and ability to work together, to communicate, t,ik<- ; /i 
quantum leap. 

The P/PC Balance is the very essence of effective r ft'.s 

validated in every arena of life. We can work with if or it, 

but ifs there. If s a lighthouse. It's the definition and ^^ir idigm of 
effectiveness upon which the Seven Habits in this h<><,\( 

How TO Use Ttm Book 

Before we begin work on th^ Seven f(abit<j of Ui^)fy Effective 
Peopiex i waakl like to pogf^ tw& pamdi^m »Mt» fhM wiU 
greadf inoeaMe the vtikm you f¥M fiCiire from tM§ mMt&r^V. 



60 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EH^ECTIVE PEOPLE 

First, I would recommend that you not "see" this material as a 
book, in the sense that it is something to read once and put on a shelf. 

You may choose to read it completely through once for a sense 
of the whole. But the material is designed to be a companion in the 
continual process of change and growth. It is organized incremen- 
tally and with suggestions for application at the end of each habit 
so that you can study and focus on any particular habit as you are 
ready. 

As you progress to deeper levels of understanding and imple- 
mentation, you can go back time and again to the principles 
contained in each habit and work to expand your knowledge, skill, 
and desire. 

Second, I would suggest that you shift your paradigm of your 
own involvement in this material from the role of learner to that of 
teacher. Take an inside-out approach, and read with the purpose 
in mind of sharing or discussing what you learn with someone else 
within 48 hours after you learn it. 

If you had known, for example, that you would be teaching the 
material on the P/PC Balance principle to someone else within 48 
hours, would it have made a difference in your reading experience? 
Try it now as you read the final section in this chapter. Read as 
though you are going to teach it to your spouse, your child, a 
business associate, or a friend today or tomorrow, while it is still 
fresh, and notice the difference in your mental and emotional 
process. 

I guarantee that if you approach the material in each of the 
following chapters in this way, you will not only better remember 
what you read, but your perspective will be expanded, your 
understanding deepened, and your motivation to apply the mate- 
rial increased. 

In addition, as you openly, honestly share what you're learning 
with others, you may be surprised to find that negative labels or 
perceptions others may have of you tend to disappear. Those you 
teach will see you as a changing, growing person, and will be more 
inclined to be helpful and supportive as you work, perhaps 
together, to integrate the Seven Habits into your lives. 

What You Can Expect 

In the last analysis, as Marilyn Ferguson observed, "No one can 
persuade another to change. Each of us guards a gate of change 



THE SEVEN HABITS — AN OVERVIEW 61 

that can only be opened from the inside. We cannot open the gate 
of another, either by argument or by emotional appeal." 

If you decide to open your "gate of change" to really understand 
and live the principles embodied in the Seven Habits, I feel 
comfortable in assuring you several positive things w^ill happen. 

First, your growth w^ill be evolutionary, but the net effect w^ill be 
revolutionary. Would you not agree that the P/PC Balance principle 
alone, if fully lived, would transform most individuals and orga- 
nizations? 

The net effect of opening the "gate of change" to the first three 
habits — the habits of Private Victory — will be significantly in- 
creased self-confidence. You will come to know yourself in a 
deeper, more meaningful way — your nature, your deepest values 
and your unique contribution capacity. As you live your values, 
your sense of identity, integrity, control, and inner-directedness 
will infuse you with both exhilaration and peace. You will define 
yourself from within, rather than by people's opinions or by 
comparisons to others. "Wrong" and "right" will have little to do 
with being found out. 

Ironically, you'll find that as you care less about what others 
think of you, you will care more about what others think of 
themselves and their worlds, including their relationship with you. 
You'll no longer build your emotional life on other people's 
weaknesses. In addition, you'll find it easier and more desirable to 
change because there is something — some core deep within — that 
is essentially changeless. 

As you open yourself to the next three habits — the habits of 
Public Victory — you will discover and unleash both the desire and 
the resources to heal and rebuild important relationships that have 
deteriorated, or even broken. Good relationships will improve — 
become deeper, more solid, more creative, and more adventure- 
some. 

The seventh habit, if deeply internalized, will renew the first six 
and will make you truly independent and capable of effective 
interdependence. Through it, you can charge your own batteries. 

Whatever your present situation, I assure you that you are not 
your habits. You can replace old patterns of self-defeating behavior 
with new patterns, new habits of effectiveness, happiness, and 
trust-based relationships. 

With genuine caring, I encourage you to open the gate of change 
and growth as you study these habits. Be patient with yourself. 



62 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Self-grow^th is tender; it's holy ground. There's no greater invest- 
ment. 

It's obviously not a quick fix. But I assure you, you w^ill feel 
benefits and see immediate payoffs that w^ill be encouraging. In the 
words of Thomas Paine, "That which we obtain too easily, we 
esteem too lightly. It is dearness only which gives everything its 
value. Heaven knows how to put a proper price on its goods." 



Part Two 



PRIVATE 

Victory 




Habit 1 
Be Proactive 

Principles of Personal Vision 




65 



66 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



/ know of no more encouraging fact 
than the unquestionable ability of man 
to elevate his life by conscious endeavor. 

Henry David Thoreau 



As you read this book, try to stand apart from yourself. Try to 
project your consciousness upward into a corner of the room 
and see yourself, in your mind's eye, reading. Can you look at 
yourself almost as though you were someone else? 

Now try something else. Think about the mood you are now in. 
Can you identify it? What are you feeling? How would you 
describe your present mental state? 

Now think for a minute about how your mind is working. Is it 
quick and alert? Do you sense that you are torn between doing this 
mental exercise and evaluating the point to be made out of it? 

Your ability to do what you just did is uniquely human. Animals 
do not possess this ability. We call it "self-awareness" or the ability 
to think about your very thought process. This is the reason why 
man has dominion over all things in the world and why he can 
make significant advances from generation to generation. 

This is why we can evaluate and learn from others' experiences 
as well as our own. This is also why we can make and break our 
habits. 

We are not our feelings. We are not our moods. We are not even 
our thoughts. The very fact that we can think about these things 
separates us from them and from the animal world. Self-awareness 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 67 

enables us to stand apart and examine even the w^ay we "see" 
ourselves — our self-paradigm, the most fundamental paradigm of 
effectiveness. It affects not only our attitudes and behaviors, but 
also how we see other people. It becomes our map of the basic 
nature of mankind. 

In fact, until we take how we see ourselves (and how we see 
others) into account, we will be unable to understand how others 
see and feel about themselves and their world. Unaware, we will 
project our intentions on their behavior and call ourselves objec- 
tive. 

This significantly limits our personal potential and our ability to 
relate to others as well. But because of the unique human capacity 
of self-awareness, we can examine our paradigms to determine 
whether they are reality- or principle-based or if they are a function 
of conditioning and conditions. 

The Social Mirror 

If the only vision we have of ourselves comes from the social 
mirror — from the current social paradigm and from the opinions, 
perceptions, and paradigms of the people around us — our view of 
ourselves is like the reflection in the crazy mirror room at the 
carnival. 

"You're never on time." 

"Why can't you ever keep things in order?" 

"You must be an artist!" 

"You eat like a horse!" 

"I can't believe you won!" 

"This is so simple. Why can't you understand?" 

These visions are disjointed and out of proportion. They are 
often more projections than reflections, projecting the concerns 
and character weaknesses of people giving the input rather than 
accurately reflecting what we are. 

The reflection of the current social paradigm tells us we are 
largely determined by conditioning and conditions. While we have 
acknowledged the tremendous power of conditioning in our lives, 
to say that we are determined by it, that we have no control over that 
influence, creates quite a different map. 

There are actually three social maps — three theories of determin- 
ism widely accepted, independently or in combination, to explain 
the nature of man. Genetic determinism basically says your grand- 



68 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

parents did it to you. That's why you have such a temper. Your 
grandparents had short tempers and it's in your DNA. It just goes 
through the generations and you inherited it. In addition, you're 
Irish, and that's the nature of Irish people. 

Psychic determinism basically says your parents did it to you. Your 
upbringing, your childhood experience essentially laid out your 
personal tendencies and your character structure. That's why 
you're afraid to be in front of a group. It's the way your parents 
brought you up. You feel terribly guilty if you make a mistake 
because you "remember" deep inside the emotional scripting 
when you were very vulnerable and tender and dependent. You 
"remember" the emotional punishment, the rejection, the compar- 
ison with somebody else when you didn't perform as well as 
expected. 

Environmental determinism basically says your boss is doing it to 
you — or your spouse, or that bratty teenager, or your economic 
situation, or national policies. Someone or something in your 
environment is responsible for your situation. 

Each of these maps is based on the stimulus/response theory we 
most often think of in connection with Pavlov's experiments with 
dogs. The basic idea is that we are conditioned to respond in a 
particular way to a particular stimulus. 



Stimulus 


Response 



REACTIVE MODEL 



How accurately and functionally do these deterministic maps 
describe the territory? How clearly do these mirrors reflect the true 
nature of man? Do they become self-fulfilling prophecies? Are they 
based on principles we can validate within ourselves? 

Between Stimulus and Response 

In answer to those questions, let me share with you the catalytic 
story of Victor Frankl. 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 69 

Frankl was a determinist raised in the tradition of Freudian 
psychology, which postulates that whatever happens to you as a 
child shapes your character and personality and basically governs 
your whole life. The limits and parameters of your life are set, and, 
basically, you can't do much about it. 

Frankl was also a psychiatrist and a Jew. He was imprisoned in 
the death camps of Nazi Germany, where he experienced things 
that were so repugnant to our sense of decency that we shudder to 
even repeat them. 

His parents, his brother, and his wife died in the camps or were 
sent to the gas ovens. Except for his sister, his entire family 
perished. Frankl himself suffered torture and innumerable indig- 
nities, never knowing from one moment to the next if his path 
would lead to the ovens or if he would be among the "saved" who 
would remove the bodies or shovel out the ashes of those so fated. 

One day, naked and alone in a small room, he began to become 
aware of what he later called "the last of the human freedoms" — 
the freedom his Nazi captors could not take away. They could 
control his entire environment, they could do what they wanted to 
his body, but Victor Frankl himself was a self-aware being who 
could look as an observer at his very involvement. His basic 
identity was intact. He could decide within himself how all of this was 
going to affect him. Between what happened to him, or the stimulus, 
and his response to it, was his freedom or power to choose that 
response. 

In the midst of his experiences, Frankl would project himself into 
different circumstances, such as lecturing to his students after his 
release from the death camps. He would describe himself in the 
classroom, in his mind's eye, and give his students the lessons he 
was learning during his very torture. 

Through a series of such disciplines — mental, emotional, and 
moral, principally using memory and imagination — he exercised 
his small, embryonic freedom until it grew larger and larger, until 
he had more freedom than his Nazi captors. They had more liberty, 
more options to choose from in their environment; but he had 
more freedom, more internal power to exercise his options. He 
became an inspiration to those around him, even to some of the 
guards. He helped others find meaning in their suffering and 
dignity in their prison existence. 

In the midst of the most degrading circumstances imaginable, 
Frankl used the human endowment of self-awareness to discover a 



70 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

fundamental principle about the nature of man: Between stimulus 
and response, man has the freedom to choose. 

Within the freedom to choose are those endowments that make 
us uniquely human. In addition to self-awareness, we have 
imagination — the ability to create in our minds beyond our present 
reality. We have conscience — a deep inner awareness of right and 
wrong, of the principles that govern our behavior, and a sense of 
the degree to which our thoughts and actions are in harmony with 
them. And we have independent will — the ability to act based on our 
self-awareness, free of all other influences. 

Even the most intelligent animals have none of these endow- 
ments. To use a computer metaphor, they are programmed by 
instinct and/or training. They can be trained to be responsible, but 
they can't take responsibility for that training; in other words, they 
can't direct it. They can't change the programming. They're not 
even aware of it. 

But because of our unique human endowments, we can write 
new programs for ourselves totally apart from our instincts and 
training. This is why an animal's capacity is relatively limited and 
man's is unlimited. But if we live like animals, out of our own 
instincts and conditioning and conditions, out of our collective 
memory, we too will be limited. 

The deterministic paradigm comes primarily from the study of 
animals — rats, monkeys, pigeons, dogs — and neurotic and psy- 
chotic people. While this may meet certain criteria of some re- 
searchers because it seems measurable and predictable, the history 
of mankind and our own self-awareness tell us that this map 
doesn't describe the territory at all! 

Our unique human endowments lift us above the animal world. 
The extent to which we exercise and develop these endowments 
empowers us to fulfill our uniquely human potential. Between 
stimulus and response is our greatest power — the freedom to 
choose. 

'Troactivity" Defined 

In discovering the basic principle of the nature of man, Frankl 
described an accurate self-map from which he began to develop the 
first and most basic habit of a highly effective person in any 
environment, the habit of proactivity. 

While the word proactivity is now fairly common in management 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 



72 



Stimulus 



Freedom 

to 
Choose 



Response 



Self- 
Awareness 




Independent 
Will 



Imagination 



Conscience 



PROACTIVE MODEL 



literature, it is a word you won't find in most dictionaries. It means 
more than merely taking initiative. It means that as human beings, 
we are responsible for our own lives. Our behavior is a function of 
our decisions, not our conditions. We can subordinate feelings to 
values. We have the initiative and the responsibility to make things 
happen. 

Look at the word responsibility — "response-ability" — the ability 
to choose your response. Highly proactive people recognize that 
responsibility. They do not blame circumstances, conditions, or 
conditioning for their behavior. Their behavior is a product of their 
own conscious choice, based on values, rather than a product of 
their conditions, based on feeling. 

Because we are, by nature, proactive, if our lives are a function 
of conditioning and conditions, it is because we have, by conscious 
decision or by default, chosen to empower those things to control 
us. 

In making such a choice, we become reactive. Reactive people are 
often affected by their physical environment. If the weather is 
good, they feel good. If it isn't, it affects their attitude and their 
performance. Proactive people can carry their own weather with 



72 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

them. Whether it rains or shines makes no difference to them. 
They are value driven; and if their value is to produce good quality 
w^ork, it isn't a function of w^hether the w^eather is conducive to it 
or not. 

Reactive people are also affected by their social environment, by 
the "social weather." When people treat them well, they feel well; 
when people don't, they become defensive or protective. Reactive 
people build their emotional lives around the behavior of others, 
empowering the weaknesses of other people to control them. 

The ability to subordinate an impulse to a value is the essence of 
the proactive person. Reactive people are driven by feelings, by 
circumstances, by conditions, by their environment. Proactive 
people are driven by values — carefully thought about, selected and 
internalized values. 

Proactive people are still influenced by external stimuli, whether 
physical, social, or psychological. But their response to the stimuli, 
conscious or unconscious, is a value-based choice or response. 

As Eleanor Roosevelt observed, "No one can hurt you without 
your consent." In the words of Gandhi, "They cannot take away 
our self respect if we do not give it to them." It is our willing 
permission, our consent to what happens to us, that hurts us far 
more than what happens to us in the first place. 

I admit this is very hard to accept emotionally, especially if we 
have had years and years of explaining our misery in the name of 
circumstance or someone else's behavior. But until a person can 
say deeply and honestly, "I am what I am today because of the 
choices I made yesterday," that person cannot say, "I choose 
otherwise." 

Once in Sacramento when I was speaking on the subject of 
proactivity, a woman in the audience stood up in the middle of my 
presentation and started talking excitedly. It was a large audience, 
and as a number of people turned to look at her, she suddenly 
became aware of what she was doing, grew embarrassed and sat 
back down. But she seemed to find it difficult to restrain herself 
and started talking to the people around her. She seemed so 
happy. 

I could hardly wait for a break to find out what had happened. 
When it finally came, I immediately went to her and asked if she 
would be willing to share her experience. 

"You just can't imagine what's happened to me!" she exclaimed. 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 7?> 

"I'm a full-time nurse to the most miserable, ungrateful man you 
can possibly imagine. Nothing I do is good enough for him. He 
never expresses appreciation; he hardly even acknowledges me. 
He constantly harps at me and finds fault with everything I do. 
This man has made my life miserable and I often take my 
frustration out on my family. The other nurses feel the same way. 
We almost pray for his demise. 

"And for you to have the gall to stand up there and suggest that 
nothing can hurt me, that no one can hurt me without my consent, 
and that I have chosen my own emotional life of being miserable — 
well, there was just no way I could buy into that. 

"But I kept thinking about it. I really went inside myself and 
began to ask, 'Do I have the power to choose my response?' 

"When I finally realized that I do have that power, when I 
swallowed that bitter pill and realized that I had chosen to be 
miserable, I also realized that I could choose not to be miserable. 

"At that moment I stood up. I felt as though I was being let out 
of San Quentin. I wanted to yell to the whole world, 'I am free! I 
am let out of prison! No longer am I going to be controlled by the 
treatment of some person.' " 

It's not what happens to us, but our response to what happens 
to us that hurts us. Of course, things can hurt us physically or 
economically and can cause sorrow. But our character, our basic 
identity, does not have to be hurt at all. In fact, our most difficult 
experiences become the crucibles that forge our character and 
develop the internal powers, the freedom to handle difficult 
circumstances in the future and to inspire others to do so as well. 

Frankl is one of many who have been able to develop the 
personal freedom in difficult circumstances to lift and inspire 
others. The autobiographical accounts of Vietnam prisoners of war 
provide additional persuasive testimony of the transforming power 
of such personal freedom and the effect of the responsible use of 
that freedom on the prison culture and on the prisoners, both then 
and now. 

We have all known individuals in very difficult circumstances, 
perhaps with a terminal illness or a severe physical handicap, 
who maintain magnificent emotional strength. How inspired we 
are by their integrity! Nothing has a greater, longer lasting im- 
pression upon another person than the awareness that some- 
one has transcended suffering, has transcended circumstance. 



74 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

and is embodying and expressing a value that inspires and 
ennobles and lifts life. 

One of the most inspiring times Sandra and I have ever had took 
place over a four-year period with a dear friend of ours named Carol, 
who had a wasting cancer disease. She had been one of Sandra's 
bridesmaids, and they had been best friends for over 25 years. 

When Carol was in the very last stages of the disease, Sandra 
spent time at her bedside helping her write her personal history. 
She returned from those protracted and difficult sessions almost 
transfixed by admiration for her friend's courage and her desire to 
write special messages to be given to her children at different 
stages in their lives. 

Carol would take as little pain-killing medication as possible, so 
that she had full access to her mental and emotional faculties. Then 
she would whisper into a tape recorder or to Sandra directly as she 
took notes. Carol was so proactive, so brave, and so concerned 
about others that she became an enormous source of inspiration to 
many people around her. 

I'll never forget the experience of looking deeply into Carol's 
eyes the day before she passed away and sensing out of that deep 
hollowed agony a person of tremendous intrinsic worth. I could 
see in her eyes a life of character, contribution, and service as well 
as love and concern and appreciation. 

Many times over the years, I have asked groups of people how 
many have ever experienced being in the presence of a dying 
individual who had a magnificent attitude and communicated love 
and compassion and served in unmatchable ways to the very end. 
Usually, about one-fourth of the audience respond in the affirma- 
tive. I then ask how many of them will never forget these 
individuals — how many were transformed, at least temporarily, by 
the inspiration of such courage, and were deeply moved and 
motivated to more noble acts of service and compassion. The same 
people respond again, almost inevitably. 

Victor Frankl suggests that there are three central values in 
life — the experiential, or that which happens to us; the creative, or 
that which we bring into existence; and the attitudinal, or our 
response in difficult circumstances such as terminal illness. 

My own experience with people confirms the point Frankl 
makes — that the highest of the three values is attitudinal, in the 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 75 

paradigm or refraining sense. In other words, what matters most is 
how we respond to what we experience in life. 

Difficult circumstances often create paradigm shifts, whole new 
frames of reference by which people see the world and themselves 
and others in it, and what life is asking of them. Their larger 
perspective reflects the attitudinal values that lift and inspire us all. 

Taking the Initiative 

Our basic nature is to act, and not be acted upon. As well as 
enabling us to choose our response to particular circumstances, 
this empowers us to create circumstances. 

Taking initiative does not mean being pushy, obnoxious, or 
aggressive. It does mean recognizing our responsibility to make 
things happen. 

Over the years, I have frequently counseled people who wanted 
better jobs to show more initiative — to take interest and aptitude 
tests, to study the industry, even the specific problems the 
organizations they are interested in are facing, and then to develop 
an effective presentation showing how their abilities can help solve 
the organization's problem. It's called "solution selling," and is a 
key paradigm in business success. 

The response is usually agreement — most people can see how 
powerfully such an approach would affect their opportunities for 
employment or advancement. But many of them fail to take the 
necessary steps, the initiative, to make it happen. 

"I don't know where to go to take the interest and aptitude 
tests." 

"How do I study industry and organizational problems? No one 
wants to help me." 

"I don't have any idea how to make an effective presentation." 

Many people wait for something to happen or someone to take 
care of them. But people who end up with the good jobs are the 
proactive ones who are solutions to problems, not problems 
themselves, who seize the initiative to do whatever is necessary, 
consistent with correct principles, to get the job done. 

Whenever someone in our family, even one of the younger 
children, takes an irresponsible position and waits for someone 
else to make things happen or provide a solution, we tell them, 
"Use your R and I!" (resourcefulness and initiative). In fact, often 
before we can say it, they answer their own complaints, "I 
know — use my R and I!" 



76 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Holding people to the responsible course is not demeaning; it is 
affirming. Proactivity is part of human nature, and, although the 
proactive muscles may be dormant, they are there. By respecting 
the proactive nature of other people, we provide them w^ith at least 
one clear, undistorted reflection from the social mirror. 

Of course, the maturity level of the individual has to be taken 
into account. We can't expect high creative cooperation from those 
who are deep into emotional dependence. But we can, at least, 
affirm their basic nature and create an atmosphere where people 
can seize opportunities and solve problems in an increasingly 
self-reliant way. 

Act or Be Acted Upon 

The difference between people who exercise initiative and those 
who don't is literally the difference between night and day. I'm not 
talking about a 25 to 50 percent difference in effectiveness; I'm 
talking about a 5000-plus percent difference, particularly if they are 
smart, aware, and sensitive to others. 

It takes initiative to create the P/PC Balance of effectiveness in 
your life. It takes initiative to develop the Seven Habits. As you 
study the other six habits, you will see that each depends on the 
development of your proactive muscles. Each puts the responsi- 
bility on you to act. If you wait to be acted upon, you will be acted 
upon. And growth and opportunity consequences attend either 
road. 

At one time I worked with a group of people in the home 
improvement industry, representatives from twenty different or- 
ganizations who met quarterly to share their numbers and prob- 
lems in an uninhibited way. 

This was during a time of heavy recession, and the negative 
impact on this particular industry was even heavier than on the 
economy in general. These people were fairly discouraged as we 
began. 

The first day, their discussion question was "What's happening 
to us? What's the stimulus?" Many things were happening. The 
environmental pressures were powerful. There was widespread 
unemployment, and many of these people were laying off friends 
just to maintain the viability of their enterprises. By the end of the 
day, everyone was even more discouraged. 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 77 

The second day, they addressed the question, "What's going to 
happen in the future?" They studied environmental trends w^ith 
the underlying reactive assumption that those things w^ould cause 
their future. By the end of the second day, they were even more 
depressed. Things w^ere going to get w^orse before they got better, 
and everyone knew it. 

So on the third day, we decided to focus on the proactive 
question, "What is our response? What are we going to do? How 
can we exercise initiative in this situation?" In the morning we 
talked about managing and reducing costs. In the afternoon we 
discussed increasing market share. We brainstormed both areas, 
then concentrated on several very practical, very doable things. A 
new spirit of excitement, hope, and proactive awareness concluded 
the meetings. 

At the very end of the third day, we summarized the results of 
the conference in a three-part answer to the question, "How's 
business?" 

Part one: What's happening to us is not good, and the trends 
suggest that it will get worse before it gets better. 

Part two: But what we are causing to happen is very good, for we 
are better managing and reducing our costs and increasing our 
market share. 

Part three: Therefore, business is better than ever. 

Now what would a reactive mind say to that? "Oh, come on. 
Face facts. You can only carry this positive thinking and self-psych 
approach so far. Sooner or later you have to face reality." 

But that's the difference between positive thinking and pro- 
activity. We did face reality. We faced the reality of the current 
circumstance and of future projections. But we also faced the 
reality that we had the power to choose a positive response to 
those circumstances and projections. Not facing reality would have 
been to accept the idea that what's happening in our environment 
had to determine us. 

Businesses, community groups, organizations of every kind — 
including families — can be proactive. They can combine the cre- 
ativity and resourcefulness of proactive individuals to create a 
proactive culture within the organization. The organization does 
not have to be at the mercy of the environment; it can take the 
initiative to accomplish the shared values and purposes of the 
individuals involved. 



78 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Listening to Our Language 

Because our attitudes and behaviors flov^ out of our paradigms, 
if we use our self-awareness to examine them, we can often see in 
them the nature of our underlying maps. Our language, for 
example, is a very real indicator of the degree to which we see 
ourselves as proactive people. 

The language of reactive people absolves them of responsibility. 

"That's me. That's just the way I am." / am determined. There's 
nothing I can do about it. 

"He makes me so mad!" I'm not responsible. My emotional life is 
governed by something outside my control. 

"I can't do that. I just don't have the time." Something outside 
me — limited time — is controlling me. 

"If only my wife were more patient." Someone else's behavior is 
limiting my effectiveness. 

"I have to do it." Circumstances or other people are forcing me to do 
what I do. I'm not free to choose my own actions. 

Reactive Language Proactive Language 

There's nothing I can do. Let's look at our alternatives. 

That's just the way I am. I can choose a different approach. 

He makes me so mad. I control my own feelings. 

They won't allow that. I can create an effective presentation. 

I have to do that. I will choose an appropriate response. 

I can't. I choose. 

I must. I prefer. 

If only. I will. 

That language comes from a basic paradigm of determinism. 
And the whole spirit of it is the transfer of responsibility. / am not 
responsible, not able to choose my response. 

One time a student asked me, "Will you excuse me from class? 
I have to go on a tennis trip." 

"You have to go, or you choose to go?" I asked. 

"I really have to," he exclaimed. 

"What will happen if you don't?" 

"Why, they'll kick me off the team." 

"How would you like that consequence?" 

"I wouldn't." 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 79 

"In other words, you choose to go because you want the conse- 
quence of staying on the team. What will happen if you miss my 
class?" 

"I don't know." 

"Think hard. What do you think would be the natural conse- 
quence of not coming to class?" 

"You wouldn't kick me out, would you?" 

"That would be a social consequence. That would be artificial. If 
you don't participate on the tennis team, you don't play. That's 
natural. But if you don't come to class, what would be the natural 
consequence?" 

"I guess I'll miss the learning." 

"That's right. So you have to weigh that consequence against the 
other consequence and make a choice. I know if it were me, I'd 
choose to go on the tennis trip. But never say you have to do 
anything." 

"I choose to go on the tennis trip," he meekly replied. 

"And miss my class?" I replied in mock disbelief. 

A serious problem with reactive language is that it becomes a 
self-fulfilling prophecy. People become reinforced in the paradigm 
that they are determined, and they produce evidence to support the 
belief. They feel increasingly victimized and out of control, not in 
charge of their life or their destiny. They blame outside forces — other 
people, circumstances, even the stars — for their own situation. 

At one seminar where I was speaking on the concept of 
proactivity, a man came up and said, "Stephen, I like what you're 
saying. But every situation is so different. Look at my marriage. I'm 
really worried. My wife and I just don't have the same feelings for 
each other we used to have. I guess I just don't love her anymore 
and she doesn't love me. What can I do?" 

"The feeling isn't there anymore?" I asked. 

"That's right," he reaffirmed. "And we have three children 
we're really concerned about. What do you suggest?" 

"Love her," I replied. 

"I told you, the feeling just isn't there anymore." 

"Love her." 

"You don't understand. The feeling of love just isn't there." 

"Then love her. If the feeling isn't there, that's a good reason to 
love her." 



80 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

"But how do you love w^hen you don't love?" 

"My friend, love is a verb. Love — the feeling — is a fruit of love, 
the verb. So love her. Serve her. Sacrifice. Listen to her. Empathize, 
Appreciate. Affirm her. Are you willing to do that?" 

In the great literature of all progressive societies, love is a verb. 
Reactive people make it a feeling. They're driven by feelings. 
Hollywood has generally scripted us to beheve that we are not 
responsible, that we are a product of our feelings. But the Holly- 
wood script does not describe the reality. If our feelings control our 
actions, it is because we have abdicated our responsibility and 
empowered them to do so. 

Proactive people make love a verb. Love is something you do: 
the sacrifices you make, the giving of self, like a mother bringing a 
newborn into the world. If you want to study love, study those 
who sacrifice for others, even for people who offend or do not love 
in return. If you are a parent, look at the love you have for the 
children you sacrificed for. Love is a value that is actualized 
through loving actions. Proactive people subordinate feelings to 
values. Love, the feeling, can be recaptured. 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 81 



No Concern 




Circle of Concern/Circle of Influence 

Another excellent way to become more self -aware regarding our 
own degree of proactivity is to look at where we focus our time and 
energy. We each have a wide range of concerns — our health, our 
children, problems at work, the national debt, nuclear war. We 
could separate those from things in which we have no particular 
mental or emotional involvement by creating a "Circle of Con- 
cern." 



82 



THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 




As we look at those things within our Circle of Concern, it 
becomes apparent that there are some things over which we have 
no real control and others that we can do something about. We 
could identify those concerns in the latter group by circumscribing 
them within a smaller Circle of Influence. 

By determining which of these two circles is the focus of most of 
our time and energy, we can discover much about the degree of 
our proactivity. 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 83 




PROACTIVE FOCUS 

(Positive energy enlarges 
the Circle of Influence) 



Proactive people focus their efforts in the Circle of Influence. 
They work on the things they can do something about. The nature 
of their energy is positive, enlarging and magnifying, causing their 
Circle of Influence to increase. 

Reactive people, on the other hand, focus their efforts in the 
Circle of Concern. They focus on the weakness of other people, the 
problems in the environment, and circumstances over which they 
have no control. Their focus results in blaming and accusing 
attitudes, reactive language, and increased feelings of victimiza- 
tion. The negative energy generated by that focus, combined with 
neglect in areas they could do something about, causes their Circle 
of Influence to shrink. 



84 



THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 




REACTIVE FOCUS 

(Negative energy reduces 
the Circle of Influence) 



As long as we are working in our Circle of Concern, we 
empower the things within it to control us. We aren't taking the 
proactive initiative necessary to effect positive change. 

Earlier, I shared with you the story of my son who was having 
serious problems in school. Sandra and I were deeply concerned 
about his apparent weaknesses and about the way other people 
were treating him. 

But those things were in our Circle of Concern. As long as we 
focused our efforts on those things, we accomplished nothing, 
except to increase our own feelings of inadequacy and helplessness 
and to reinforce our son's dependence. 

It was only when we went to work in our Circle of Influence, 
when we focused on our own paradigms, that we began to create 
a positive energy that changed ourselves and eventually influenced 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 85 

our son as well. By working on ourselves instead of worrying 
about conditions, we were able to influence the conditions. 

Because of position, wealth, role, or relationships, there are 
some circumstances in which a person's Circle of Influence is larger 
than his or her Circle of Concern. 



This situation reflects a self-inflicted emotional myopia — another 
reactive selfish life-style focused in the Circle of Concern. 

Though they may have to prioritize the use of their influence, 
proactive people have a Circle of Concern that is at least as big as 
their Circle of Influence, accepting the responsibility to use their 
influence effectively. 

Direct, Indirect, and No Control 

The problems we face fall in one of three areas: direct control 
(problems involving our own behavior); indirect control (problems 
involving other people's behavior); or no control (problems we can 
do nothing about, such as our past or situational reahties). The 
proactive approach puts the first step in the solution of all three 
kinds of problems within our present Circle of Influence. 



86 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Direct control problems are solved by working on our habits. 
They are obviously within our Circle of Influence. These are the 
"Private Victories" of Habits 1, 2, and 3. 

Indirect control problems are solved by changing our methods of 
influence. These are the "Public Victories" of Habits 4, 5, and 6. I 
have personally identified over 30 separate methods of human 
influence— as separate as empathy is from confrontation, as sepa- 
rate as example is from persuasion. Most people have only three or 
four of these methods in their repertoire, starting usually with 
reasoning, and, if that doesn't work, moving to flight or fight. How 
liberating it is to accept the idea that I can learn new methods of 
human influence instead of constantly trying to use old ineffective 
methods to "shape up" someone else! 

No control problems involve taking the responsibility to change 
the line on the bottom on our face — to smile, to genuinely and 
peacefully accept these problems and learn to live with them, even 
though we don't like them. In this way, we do not empower these 
problems to control us. We share in the spirit embodied in the 
Alcoholics Anonymous prayer, "Lord, give me the courage to 
change the things which can and ought to be changed, the serenity 
to accept the things which cannot be changed, and the wisdom to 
know the difference." 

Whether a problem is direct, indirect, or no control, we have in 
our hands the first step to the solution. Changing our habits, 
changing our methods of influence and changing the way we see 
our no control problems are all within our Circle of Influence. 

Expanding the Circle of Influence 

It is inspiring to realize that in choosing our response to 
circumstance, we powerfully affect our circumstance. When we 
change one part of the chemical formula, we change the nature of 
the results. 

I worked with one organization for several years that was 
headed by a very dynamic person. He could read trends. He was 
creative, talented, capable, and brilhant — and everyone knew it. 
But he had a very dictatorial style of management. He tended to 
treat people like "gofers," as if they didn't have any judgment. His 
manner of speaking to those who worked in the organization was, 
"Go for this ... go for that . . . now do this . . . now do that — I'll 
make the decisions." 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 87 

The net effect was that he alienated almost the entire executive 
team surrounding him. They would gather in the corridors and 
complain to each other about him. Their discussion was all very 
sophisticated, very articulate, as if they were trying to help the 
situation. But they did it endlessly, absolving themselves of 
responsibility in the name of the president's weaknesses. 

"You can't imagine what's happened this time," someone would 
say. "The other day he went into my department. I had everything 
all laid out. But he came in and gave totally different signals. 
Everything I'd done for months was shot, just like that. I don't 
know how I'm supposed to keep working for him. How long will 
it be until he retires?" 

"He's only fifty-nine," someone else would respond. "Do you 
think you can survive for six more years?" 

"I don't know. He's the kind of person they probably won't 
retire anyway." 

But one of the executives was proactive. He was driven by 
values, not feelings. He took the initiative — he anticipated, he 
empathized, he read the situation. He was not blind to the 
president's weaknesses; but instead of criticizing them, he would 
compensate for them. Where the president was weak in his style, 
he'd try to buffer his own people and make such weaknesses 
irrelevant. And he'd work with the president's strengths — his 
vision, talent, creativity. 

This man focused on his Circle of Influence. He was treated like 
a gofer, also. But he would do more than what was expected. He 
anticipated the president's need. He read with empathy the 
president's underlying concern, so when he presented informa- 
tion, he also gave his analysis and his recommendations based on 
that analysis. 

As I sat one day with the president in an advisory capacity, he 
said, "Stephen, I just can't believe what this man has done. He's 
not only given me the information I requested, but he's provided 
additional information that's exactly what we needed. He even 
gave me his analysis of it in terms of my deepest concerns, and a 
list of his recommendations. 

"The recommendations are consistent with the analysis, and the 
analysis is consistent with the data. He's remarkable! What a relief 
not to have to worry about this part of the business." 

At the next meeting, it was "go for this" and "go for that" to all 
the executives . . . but one. To this man, it was "What's your 
opinion?" His Circle of Influence had grown. 



Ob THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

This caused quite a stir in the organization. The reactive minds in 
the executive corridors began shooting their vindictive ammunition 
at this proactive man. 

It's the nature of reactive people to absolve themselves of 
responsibility. It's so much safer to say, "I am not responsible." If 
I say "I am responsible," I might have to say, "I am irresponsible." 
It w^ould be very hard for me to say that I have the power to choose 
my response and that the response I have chosen has resulted in 
my involvement in a negative, collusive environment, especially if 
for years I have absolved myself of responsibility for results in the 
name of someone else's w^eaknesses. 

So these executives focused on finding more information, more 
ammunition, more evidence as to why they weren't responsible. 

But this man was proactive toward them, too. Little by little, his 
Circle of Influence toward them grew also. It continued to expand 
to the extent that eventually no one made any significant moves in 
the organization without that man's involvement and approval, 
including the president. But the president did not feel threatened 
because this man's strength complemented his strength and com- 
pensated for his weaknesses. So he had the strength of two people, 
a complementary team. 

This man's success was not dependent on his circumstances. 
Many others were in the same situation. It was his chosen 
response to those circumstances, his focus on his Circle of Influ- 
ence, that made the difference. 

There are some people who interpret "proactive" to mean 
pushy, aggressive, or insensitive; but that isn't the case at all. 
Proactive people aren't pushy. They're smart, they're value driven, 
they read reality, and they know what's needed. 

Look at Gandhi. While his accusers were in the legislative 
chambers criticizing him because he wouldn't join in their Circle of 
Concern Rhetoric condemning the British Empire for their subju- 
gation of the Indian people, Gandhi was out in the rice paddies, 
quietly, slowly, imperceptibly expanding his Circle of Influence 
with the field laborers. A ground swell of support, of trust, of 
confidence followed him through the countryside. Though he held 
no office or political position, through compassion, courage, fast- 
ing, and moral persuasion he eventually brought England to its 
knees, breaking political domination of three hundred million 
people with the power of his greatly expanded Circle of Influence. 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 89 



The ''Have's" and the "Be's' 



One way to determine which circle our concern is in is to 
distinguish between the have's and the he's. The Circle of Concern 
is filled with the have's: 

"I'll be happy when I have my house paid off." 

"If only I had a boss who wasn't such a dictator. ..." 

"If only I had a more patient husband. . . ." 

"// / had more obedient kids. ..." 

"/// had my degree. . . ." 

"// / could just have more time to myself. ..." 

The Circle of Influence is filled with the he's — I can be more 
patient, be wise, be loving. It's the character focus. 

Anytime we think the problem is "out there," that thought is the 
problem. We empower what's out there to control us. The change 
paradigm is "outside-in" — what's out there has to change before 
we can change. 

The proactive approach is to change from the inside-out: to be 
different, and by being different, to effect positive change in what's 
out there — I can be more resourceful, I can be more diligent, I can be 
more creative, I can be more cooperative. 

One of my favorite stories is one in the Old Testament, part of the 
fundamental fabric of the Judeo-Christian tradition. It's the story of 
Joseph, who was sold into slavery in Egypt by his brothers at the age 
of seventeen. Can you imagine how easy it would have been for him 
to languish in self-pity as a servant of Potiphar, to focus on the 
weaknesses of his brothers and his captors and on all he didn't have? 
But Joseph was proactive. He worked on be. And within a short 
period of time, he was running Potiphar's household. He was in 
charge of all that Potiphar had because the trust was so high. 

Then the day came when Joseph was caught in a difficult 
situation and refused to compromise his integrity. As a result, he 
was unjustly imprisoned for thirteen years. But again he was 
proactive. He worked on the inner circle, on being instead of having, 
and soon he was running the prison and eventually the entire 
nation of Egypt, second only to the Pharaoh. 

I know this idea is a dramatic paradigm shift for many people. It 
is so much easier to blame other people, conditioning, or conditions 
for our own stagnant situation. But we are responsible — "response- 
able" — to control our lives and to powerfully influence our circum- 
stances by working on be, on what we are. 



90 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

If I have a problem in my marriage, what do I really gain by 
continually confessing my w^ife's sins? By saying I'm not respon- 
sible, I make myself a powerless victim; I immobilize myself in a 
negative situation. I also diminish my ability to influence her — my 
nagging, accusing, critical attitude only makes her feel validated in 
her own weakness. My criticism is worse than the conduct I want 
to correct. My ability to positively impact the situation withers and 
dies. 

If I really want to improve my situation, I can work on the one 
thing over which I have control — myself. I can stop trying to shape 
up my wife and work on my own weaknesses. I can focus on being 
a great marriage partner, a source of unconditional love and 
support. Hopefully, my wife will feel the power of proactive 
example and respond in kind. But whether she does or doesn't, the 
most positive way I can influence my situation is to work on 
myself, on my being. 

There are so many ways to work in the Circle of Influence — to be 
a better listener, to be a more loving marriage partner, to be a better 
student, to be a more cooperative and dedicated employee. Some- 
times the most proactive thing we can do is to be happy, just to 
genuinely smile. Happiness, like unhappiness, is a proactive 
choice. There are things, like the weather, that our Circle of 
Influence will never include. But as proactive people, we can carry 
our own physical or social weather with us. We can be happy and 
accept those things that at present we can't control, while we focus 
our efforts on the things that we can. 

The Other End of the Stick 

Before we totally shift our life focus to our Circle of Influence, we 
need to consider two things in our Circle of Concern that merit 
deeper thought — consequences and mistakes. 

While we are free to choose our actions, we are not free to choose 
the consequences of those actions. Consequences are governed by 
natural law. They are out in the Circle of Concern. We can decide 
to step in front of a fast-moving train, but we cannot decide what 
will happen when the train hits us. 

We can decide to be dishonest in our business dealings. While 
the social consequences of that decision may vary depending on 
whether or not we are found out, the natural consequences to our 
basic character are a fixed result. 

Our behavior is governed by principles. Living in harmony with 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 91 

them brings positive consequences; violating them brings negative 
consequences. We are free to choose our response in any situation, 
but in doing so, we choose the attendant consequence. "When we 
pick up one end of the stick, we pick up the other." 

Undoubtedly, there have been times in each of our lives when 
we have picked up what we later felt was the wrong stick. Our 
choices have brought consequences we would rather have lived 
without. If we had the choice to make over again, we would make 
it differently. We call these choices mistakes, and they are the 
second thing that merits our deeper thought. 

For those filled with regret, perhaps the most needful exercise of 
proactivity is to realize that past mistakes are also out there in the 
Circle of Concern. We can't recall them, we can't undo them, we 
can't control the consequences that came as a result. 

As a college quarterback, one of my sons learned to snap his 
wristband between plays as a kind of mental checkoff whenever he , 
or anyone made a "setting back" mistake, so the last mistake 
wouldn't affect the resolve and execution of the next play. 

The proactive approach to a mistake is to acknowledge it 
instantly, correct and learn from it. This literally turns a failure into 
a success. "Success," said IBM founder T. J. Watson, "is on the far 
side of failure." 

But not to acknowledge a mistake, not to correct it and learn 
from it, is a mistake of a different order. It usually puts a person on 
a self-deceiving, self -justifying path, often involving rationalization 
(rational lies) to self and to others. This second mistake, this 
cover-up, empowers the first, giving it disproportionate impor- 
tance, and causes far deeper injury to self. 

It is not what others do or even our own mistakes that hurt us 
the most; it is our response to those things. Chasing after the 
poisonous snake that bites us will only drive the poison through 
our entire system. It is far better to take measures immediately to 
get the poison out. 

Our response to any mistake affects the quality of the next 
moment. It is important to immediately admit and correct our 
mistakes so that they have no power over that next moment and 
we are empowered again. 

Making and Keeping Commitments 

At the very heart of our Circle of Influence is our ability to make 
and keep commitments and promises. The commitments we make 



92 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

to ourselves and to others, and our integrity to those commitments, 
is the essence and clearest manifestation of our proactivity. 

It is also the essence of our grow^th. Through our human 
endowments of self-awareness and conscience, we become conscious 
of areas of weakness, areas for improvement, areas of talent that 
could be developed, areas that need to be changed or ehminated 
from our lives. Then, as we recognize and use our imagination and 
independent will to act on that awareness — making promises, setting 
goals, and being true to them — we build the strength of character, 
the being, that makes possible every other positive thing in our 
lives. 

It is here that we find two ways to put ourselves in control of our 
lives immediately. We can make a promise — and keep it. Or we can 
set a goal — and work to achieve it. As we make and keep commit- 
ments, even small commitments, we begin to establish an inner 
integrity that gives us the awareness of self-control and the 
courage and strength to accept more of the responsibility for our 
own lives. By making and keeping promises to ourselves and 
others, little by little, our honor becomes greater than our moods. 

The power to make and keep commitments to ourselves is the 
essence of developing the basic habits of effectiveness. Knowledge, 
skill, and desire are all within our control. We can work on any one 
to improve the balance of the three. As the area of intersection 
becomes larger, we more deeply internalize the principles upon 
which the habits are based and create the strength of character to 
move us in a balanced way toward increasing effectiveness in our 
lives. 

Proactivity: The Thirty-Day Test 

We don't have to go through the death camp experience of 
Frankl to recognize and develop our own proactivity. It is in the 
ordinary events of every day that we develop the proactive 
capacity to handle the extraordinary pressures of life. It's how we 
make and keep commitments, how we handle a traffic jam, how 
we respond to an irate customer or a disobedient child. It's how we 
view our problems and where we focus our energies. It's the 
language we use. 

I would challenge you to test the principle of proactivity for 
thirty days. Simply try it and see what happens. For thirty days 
work only in your Circle of Influence. Make small commitments 



HABIT 1 BE PROACTIVE 93 

and keep them. Be a light, not a judge. Be a model, not a critic. Be 
part of the solution, not part of the problem. 

Try it in your marriage, in your family, in your job. Don't argue 
for other people's weaknesses. Don't argue for your own. When 
you make a mistake, admit it, correct it, and learn from it — 
immediately. Don't get into a blaming, accusing mode. Work on 
things you have control over. Work on you. On be. 

Look at the weaknesses of others with compassion, not accusa- 
tion. It's not what they're not doing or should be doing that's the 
issue. The issue is your own chosen response to the situation and 
what you should be doing. If you start to think the problem is "out 
there," stop yourself. That thought is the problem. 

People who exercise their embryonic freedom day after day will, 
little by little, expand that freedom. People who do not will find 
that it withers until they are literally "being lived." They are acting 
out the scripts written by parents, associates, and society. 

We are responsible for our own effectiveness, for our own 
happiness, and ultimately, I would say, for most of our circum- 
stances. 

Samuel Johnson observed: "The fountain of content must spring 
up in the mind, and he who hath so little knowledge of human 
nature as to seek happiness by changing anything but his own 
disposition, will waste his life in fruitless efforts and multiply the 
grief he proposes to remove." 

Knowing that we are responsible — "response-able" — is funda- 
mental to effectiveness and to every other habit of effectiveness we 
will discuss. 

Application Suggestions 

1. For a full day, listen to your language and to the language of the 
people around you. How often do you use and hear reactive 
phrases such as "If only," "I can't," or "I have to"? 

2. Identify an experience you might encounter in the near future 
where, based on past experience, you would probably behave 
reactively. Review the situation in the context of your Circle of 
Influence. How could you respond proactively? Take several 
moments and create the experience vividly in your mind, pictur- 
ing yourself responding in a proactive manner. Remind yourself 
of the gap between stimulus and response. Make a commitment 
to yourself to exercise your freedom to choose. 



94 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

3. Select a problem from your work or personal life that is frustrating 
to you. Determine whether it is a direct, indirect, or no control 
problem. Identify the first step you can take in your Circle of 
Influence to solve it and then take that step. 

4. Try the thirty-day test of proactivity. Be aware of the change in 
your Circle of Influence. 



Habit 2 
Begin with the End in Mind 

Principles of Personal Leadership 




95 



96 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



What lies behind us and what lies before us 

are tiny matters 

compared to what lies within us. 

Oliver Wendell Holmes 



PLEASE FIND A PLACE TO READ THESE NEXT FEW PAGES wherC yOU Can be 
alone and uninterrupted. Clear your mind of everything except 
what you will read and what I will invite you to do. Don't worry 
about your schedule, your business, your family, or your friends. 
Just focus with me and really open your mind. 

In your mind's eye, see yourself going to the funeral of a loved 
one. Picture yourself driving to the funeral parlor or chapel, 
parking the car, and getting out. As you walk inside the building, 
you notice the flowers, the soft organ music. You see the faces of 
friends and family you pass along the way. You feel the shared 
sorrow of losing, the joy of having known, that radiates from the 
hearts of the people there. 

As you walk down to the front of the room and look inside the 
casket, you suddenly come face to face with yourself. This is your 
funeral, three years from today. All these people have come to 
honor you, to express feelings of love and appreciation for your 
life. 

As you take a seat and wait for the services to begin, you look at 
the program in your hand. There are to be four speakers. The first 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 97 

is from your family, immediate and also extended — children, 
brothers, sisters, nephews, nieces, aunts, uncles, cousins, and 
grandparents who have come from all over the country to attend. 
The second speaker is one of your friends, someone who can give 
a sense of what you were as a person. The third speaker is from 
your work or profession. And the fourth is from your church or 
some community organization where you've been involved in 
service. 

Now think deeply. What would you like each of these speakers 
to say about you and your life? What kind of husband, wife, father, 
or mother would you like their words to reflect? What kind of son 
or daughter or cousin? What kind of friend? What kind of working 
associate? 

What character would you like them to have seen in you? What 
contributions, what achievements would you want them to remem- 
ber? Look carefully at the people around you. What difference 
would you like to have made in their lives? 

Before you read further, take a few minutes to jot down your 
impressions. It will greatly increase your personal understanding 
of Habit 2. 

What It Means to "Begin with the End in Mind" 

If you participated seriously in this visualization experience, you 
touched for a moment some of your deep, fundamental values. 
You established brief contact with that inner guidance system at 
the heart of your Circle of Influence. 

Consider the words of Joseph Addison: 

When I look upon the tombs of the great, every emotion of envy 
dies in me; when I read the epitaphs of the beautiful, every 
inordinate desire goes out; when I meet with the grief of parents 
upon a tombstone, my heart melts with compassion; when 1 see the 
tomb of the parents themselves, I consider the vanity of grieving 
for those whom we must quickly follow: when I see kings lying by 
those who deposed them, when I consider rival wits placed side by 
side, or the holy men that divided the world with their contests 
and disputes, I reflect with sorrow and astonishment on the little 
competitions, factions, and debates of mankind. When I read the 
several dates of the tombs, of some that died yesterday, and some 
six hundred years ago, I consider that great Day when we shall all 
of us be Contemporaries, and make our appearance together. 



98 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Although Habit 2 applies to many different circumstances and 
levels of life, the most fundamental application of "begin with the 
end in mind" is to begin today w^ith the image, picture, or 
paradigm of the end of your life as your frame of reference or the 
criterion by which everything else is examined. Each part of your 
life — today's behavior, tomorrow's behavior, next week's behavior, 
next month's behavior — can be examined in the context of the 
whole, of what really matters most to you. By keeping that end 
clearly in mind, you can make certain that whatever you do on any 
particular day does not violate the criteria you have defined as 
supremely important, and that each day of your life contributes in 
a meaningful way to the vision you have of your life as a whole. 

To begin with the end in mind means to start with a clear 
understanding of your destination. It means to know where you're 
going so that you better understand where you are now and so that 
the steps you take are always in the right direction. 

It's incredibly easy to get caught up in an activity trap, in the 
busy-ness of life, to work harder and harder at climbing the ladder 
of success only to discover it's leaning against the wrong wall. It is 
possible to be busy — very busy — without being very effective. 

People often find themselves achieving victories that are empty, 
successes that have come at the expense of things they suddenly 
realize were far more valuable to them. People from every walk of 
life — doctors, academicians, actors, politicians, business profes- 
sionals, athletes, and plumbers — often struggle to achieve a higher 
income, more recognition or a certain degree of professional 
competence, only to find that their drive to achieve their goal 
blinded them to the things that really mattered most and now are 
gone. 

How different our lives are when we really know what is deeply 
important to us, and, keeping that picture in mind, we manage 
ourselves each day to be and to do what really matters most. If the 
ladder is not leaning against the right wall, every step we take just 
gets us to the wrong place faster. We may be very busy, we may be 
very efficient, but we will also be truly effective only when we begin 
with the end in mind. 

If you carefully consider what you wanted to be said of you in 
the funeral experience, you will find your definition of success. It 
may be very different from the definition you thought you had in 
mind. Perhaps fame, achievement, money, or some of the other 
things we strive for are not even part of the right wall. 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 99 

When you begin with the end in mind, you gain a different 
perspective. One man asked another on the death of a mutual 
friend, "How much did he leave?" His friend responded, "He left 
it all." 



All Things Are Created Twice 

"Begin with the end in mind" is based on the principle that all 
things are created twice. There's a mental or first creation, and a 
physical or second creation to all things. 

Take the construction of a home, for example. You create it in 
every detail before you ever hammer the first nail into place. You 
try to get a very clear sense of what kind of house you want. If you 
want a family-centered home, you plan to put a family room where 
it would be a natural gathering place. You plan sliding doors and 
a patio for children to play outside. You work with ideas. You work 
with your mind until you get a clear image of what you want to 
build. 

Then you reduce it to blueprint and develop construction plans. 
All of this is done before the earth is touched. If not, then in the 
second creation, the physical creation, you will have to make 
expensive changes that may double the cost of your home. 

The carpenter's rule is "measure twice, cut once." You have to 
make sure that the blueprint, the first creation, is really what you 
want, that you've thought everything through. Then you put it 
into bricks and mortar. Each day you go to the construction shed 
and pull out the blueprint to get marching orders for the day. You 
begin with the end in mind. 

For another example, look at a business. If you want to have a 
successful enterprise, you clearly define what you're trying to 
accomplish. You carefully think through the product or service you 
want to provide in terms of your market target, then you organize 
all the elements — financial, research and development, operations, 
marketing, personnel, physical facilities, and so on — to meet that 
objective. The extent to which you begin with the end in mind 
often determines whether or not you are able to create a successful 
enterprise. Most business failures begin in the first creation, with 
problems such as undercapitalization, misunderstanding of the 
market, or lack of a business plan. 

Tne same is true with parenting. If you want to raise responsible, 
self-disciplined children, you have to keep that end clearly in mind 



100 THE SE\'E\ HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIXT PEOPLE 

as you interact with your children on a daily basis. You can't 
behave toward them in ways that undermine their self-discipline 
or self-esteem. 

To varying degrees, people use this principle in many different 
areas of life. Before you go on a trip, you determine your 
destination and plan out the best route. Before you plant a garden, 
you plan it out in your mind, possibly on paper. You create 
speeches on paper before you give them, you en\ision the land- 
scaping in your yard before you landscape it, you design the 
clothes you make before you thread the needle. 

To the extent to which we understand the principle of two 
creations and accept the responsibility for both, we act within and 
enlarge the borders of our Circle of Influence. To the extent to 
which we do not operate in harmony with this principle and take 
charge of the first creation, we diminish it. 

By Design or Default 

It's a principle that all things are created twice, but not all first 
creations are by conscious design. In our personal lives, if we do 
not develop our own self-awareness and become responsible for 
first creations, we empower other people and circumstances 
outside our Circle of Influence to shape much of our lives by 
default. We reactively live the scripts handed to us by family, 
associates, other people's agendas, the pressures of circum- 
stance — scripts from our earlier years, from our training, our 
conditioning. 

These scripts come from people, not principles. And they rise 
out of our deep vulnerabilities, our deep dependency on others 
and our needs for acceptance and love, for belonging, for a sense 
of importance and worth, for a feeling that we matter. 

Whether we are aware of it or not, whether we are in control of 
it or not, there is a first creation to every part of our lives. We are 
either the second creation of our own proactive design, or we are 
the second creation of other people's agendas, of circumstances, or 
of past habits. 

The unique human capacities of self-awareness, imagination, 
and conscience enable us to examine first creations and make it 
possible for us to take charge of our own first creation, to write our 
own script. Put another way. Habit 1 says, "You are the creator." 
Habit 2 is the first creation. 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WTTH THE END IN MIND 101 

Lf • r^Ff'^ffip • '.r. M' sAGEMENT — TffF Two Creations 

Habit 2 IS based on principles of personal leadership, which 
means that leadership is the first creation. Leadership is not 
management. Management is the second creation, which we'll 
discuss in the chapter on Habit 3. But leadership has to come first. 

Management is a bottom line focus: How can J best accomplish 
certain things? Leadership deals with the top line: What are the 
things I want to accomplish? in the words of both Peter Drucker 
and Warren Bennis, "Management is doing things right; leadership 
IS doing the light tilings/' Management is effidency in climbing the 
Udder oi success; leadership determines whetiier the ladder is 
leaning ag^unst the right wad. 

You can quiddy grasp the important difference between the two 
if you envision a group of producers cutting their way through the 
jungle with madietes. They're the producers, the problem solvers. 
They're cutting tiiroug^i the undergrowth^ clearing it out. 

The managers arc behind tiiem, sharpening their machetes, 
writing po&cy and procedure manuals, holding muscle develop- 
ment programs^ hringing in improved tedmcrfogies and setting up 
working sdiedules aiid omipensation programs for madiete wield- 
ers. 

The leader is tiie one who dimbs tiie tallest tree, surveys the 
entire situation^ and ydls, "Wrong jungle!" 

But how do the busy^ efficient producers and managers often 
respond? "Shut up! We're making progress." 

As individuaJs, groups, and bu^nesses, we're often so busy 
cutting through tiie undergrowth we don^t even realize we're in 
the wrof^iui^le. And tiie rapidly diai^if^ environment in which 
we Kve makes elective ]eadaship mote critical tiian it has ever 
been — in every aspect of independent and interdependent Hfe, 

We are more in need of a vi^on or destination and a compass (a 
set of princ^iles or directions) and less in need of a road map. We 
often don't know what the terrain ahead will be like or what we 
wiD need to go throi^ it; mudi will depend on our judgment at 
tiie time. But an iimer compass wiD always give us direction. 

Effectiveness — often even survival — does not depend sckfy on 
how much effort we e^^^end^ but on whetiier or not tiie effort we 
expend is in the right |tM^ie> And tiie metamorphoMs taking place 
in most every industry and profession demands leadership first 
and man^ement second. 



102 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

In business, the market is changing so rapidly that many 
products and services that successfully met consumer tastes and 
needs a few years ago are obsolete today. Proactive pov^erful 
leadership must constantly monitor environmental change, partic- 
ularly customer buying habits and motives, and provide the force 
necessary to organize resources in the right direction. 

Such changes as deregulation of the airline industry, skyrocket- 
ing costs of health care, and the greater quality and quantity of 
imported cars impact the environment in significant ways. If 
industries do not monitor the environment, including their ow^n 
work teams, and exercise the creative leadership to keep headed in 
the right direction, no amount of management expertise can keep 
them from failing. 

Efficient management without effective leadership is, as one 
individual has phrased it, "like straightening deck chairs on the 
Titanic." No management success can compensate for failure in 
leadership. But leadership is hard because we're often caught in a 
management paradigm. 

At the final session of a year-long executive development pro- 
gram in Seattle, the president of an oil company came up to me and 
said, "Stephen, when you pointed out the difference between 
leadership and management in the second month, I looked at my 
role as the president of this company and realized that I had never 
been into leadership. I was deep into management, buried by 
pressing challenges and the details of day-to-day logistics. So I 
decided to withdraw from management. I could get other people to 
do that. I wanted to really lead my organization. 

"It was hard. I went through withdrawal pains because I 
stopped dealing with a lot of the pressing, urgent matters that 
were right in front of me and which gave me a sense of immediate 
accomplishment. I didn't receive much satisfaction as I started 
wrestling with the direction issues, the culture building issues, the 
deep analysis of problems, the seizing of new opportunities. 
Others also went through withdrawal pains from their working 
style comfort zones. They missed the easy accessibility I had given 
them before. They still wanted me to be available to them, to 
respond, to help solve their problems on a day-to-day basis. 

"But I persisted. I was absolutely convinced that I needed to 
provide leadership. And I did. Today our whole business is 
different. We're more in line with our environment. We have 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 103 

doubled our revenues and quadrupled our profits. I'm into lead- 
ership." 

I'm convinced that too often parents are also trapped in the 
management paradigm, thinking of control, efficiency, and rules 
instead of direction, purpose, and family feeling. 

And leadership is even more lacking in our personal lives. We're 
into managing with efficiency, setting and achieving goals before 
we have even clarified our values. 

Rescripting: Becoming Your Own First Creator 

As we previously observed, proactivity is based on the unique 
human endowment of self-awareness. The two additional unique 
human endowments that enable us to expand our proactivity and 
to exercise personal leadership in our lives are imagination and 
conscience. 

Through imagination, we can visualize the uncreated worlds of 
potential that lie within us. Through conscience, we can come in 
contact with universal laws or principles with our own singular 
talents and avenues of contribution, and with the personal guide- 
lines within which we can most effectively develop them. Com- 
bined with self-awareness, these two endowments empower us to 
write our own script. 

Because we already live with many scripts that have been 
handed to us, the process of writing our own script is actually more 
a process of "rescripting," or paradigm shifting — of changing some 
of the basic paradigms that we already have. As we recognize the 
ineffective scripts, the incorrect or incomplete paradigms within 
us, we can proactively begin to rescript ourselves. 

I think one of the most inspiring accounts of the rescripting 
process comes from the autobiography of Anwar Sadat, past 
president of Egypt. Sadat had been reared, nurtured, and deeply 
scripted in a hatred for Israel. He would make the statement on 
national television, 'T will never shake the hand of an Israeli as 
long as they occupy one inch of Arab soil. Never, never, never!" 
And huge crowds all around the country would chant, "Never, 
never, never!" He marshalled the energy and unified the will of the 
whole country in that script. 

The script was very independent and nationalistic, and it 



104 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

aroused deep emotions in the people. But it w^as also very foolish, 
and Sadat knev^^ it. It ignored the perilous, highly interdependent 
reality of the situation. 

So he rescripted himself. It was a process he had learned w^hen 
he w^as a young man imprisoned in Cell 54, a solitary cell in Cairo 
Central Prison, as a result of his involvement in a conspiracy plot 
against King Farouk. He learned to withdraw^ from his own mind 
and look at it to see if the scripts were appropriate and wise. He 
learned how to vacate his own mind and, through a deep personal 
process of meditation, to work with his own scriptures, his own 
form of prayer, and rescript himself. 

He records that he was almost loathe to leave his prison cell 
because it was there that he realized that real success is success 
with self. It's not in having things, but in having mastery, having 
victory over self. 

For a period of time during Nasser's administration Sadat was 
relegated to a position of relative insignificance. Everyone felt that 
his spirit was broken, but it wasn't. They were projecting their own 
home movies onto him. They didn't understand him. He was 
biding his time. 

And when that time came, when he became president of Egypt 
and confronted the political realities, he rescripted himself toward 
Israel. He visited the Knesset in Tel Aviv and opened up one of the 
most precedent-breaking peace movements in the history of the 
world, a bold initiative that eventually brought about the Camp 
David Accord. 

Sadat was able to use his self-awareness, his imagination and his 
conscience to exercise personal leadership, to change an essential 
paradigm, to change the way he saw the situation. He worked in 
the center of his Circle of Influence. And from that rescripting, that 
change in paradigm, flowed changes in behavior and attitude that 
affected millions of lives in the wider Circle of Concern. 

In developing our own self-awareness many of us discover 
ineffective scripts, deeply embedded habits that are totally unwor- 
thy of us, totally incongruent with the things we really value in life. 
Habit 2 says we don't have to live with those scripts. We are 
response-able to use our imagination and creativity to write new 
ones that are more effective, more congruent with our deepest 
values and with the correct principles that give our values meaning. 

Suppose, for example, that I am highly overreactive to my 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 105 

children. Suppose that whenever they begin to do something I feel 
is inappropriate, I sense an immediate tensing in the pit of my 
stomach. I feel defensive walls go up; I prepare for battle. My focus 
is not on the long-term growth and understanding but on the 
short-term behavior. I'm trying to win the battle, not the war. 

I pull out my ammunition — my superior size, my position of 
authority — and I yell or intimidate or I threaten or punish. And I 
win. I stand there, victorious, in the middle of the debris of a 
shattered relationship while my children are outwardly submissive 
and inwardly rebellious, suppressing feelings that will come out 
later in uglier ways. 

Now if I were sitting at that funeral we visualized earlier, and 
one of my children was about to speak, I would want his life to 
represent the victory of teaching, training, and disciplining with 
love over a period of years rather than the battle scars of quick fix 
skirmishes. I would want his heart and mind to be filled with the 
pleasant memories of deep, meaningful times together. I would 
want him to remember me as a loving father who shared the fun 
and the pain of growing up. I would want him to remember the 
times he came to me with his problems and concerns. I would want 
to have listened and loved and helped. I would want him to know 
I wasn't perfect, but that I had tried with everything I had. And 
that, perhaps more than anybody in the world, I loved him. 

The reason I would want those things is because, deep down, I 
value my children. I love them, I want to help them. I value my 
role as their father. 

But I don't always see those values. I get caught up in the "thick 
of thin things." What matters most gets buried under layers of 
pressing problems, immediate concerns, and outward behaviors. I 
become reactive. And the way I interact with my children every 
day often bears little resemblance to the way I deeply feel about 
them. 

Because I am self-aware, because I have imagination and con- 
science, I can examine my deepest values. I can realize that the 
script I'm living is not in harmony with those values, that my life 
is not the product of my own proactive design, but the result of the 
first creation I have deferred to circumstances and other people. 
And I can change. I can live out of my imagination instead of my 
memory. I can tie myself to my limitless potential instead of my 
limiting past. I can become my own first creator. 

To begin with the end in mind means to approach my role as a 



206 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

parent, as v^ell as my other roles in life, with my values and 
directions clear. It means to be responsible for my own first 
creation, to rescript myself so that the paradigms from which my 
behavior and attitude flow are congruent with my deepest values 
and in harmony with correct principles. 

It also means to begin each day with those values firmly in mind. 
Then as the vicissitudes, as the challenges come, I can make my 
decisions based on those values. I can act with integrity. I don't 
have to react to the emotion, the circumstance. 1 can be truly 
proactive, value driven, because my values are clear. 

A Personal Mission Statement 

The most effective way I know to begin with the end in mind is 
to develop a personal mission statement or philosophy or creed. It 
focuses on what you want to be (character) and to do (contributions 
and achievements) and on the values or principles upon which 
being and doing are based. 

Because each individual is unique, a personal mission statement 
will reflect that uniqueness, both in content and form. My friend, 
Rolfe Kerr, has expressed his personal creed in this way: 

Succeed at home first. 

Seek and merit divine help. 

Never compromise with honesty. 

Remember the people involved. 

Hear both sides before judging. 

Obtain counsel of others. 

Defend those who are absent. 

Be sincere yet decisive. 

Develop one new proficiency a year. 

Plan tomorrow's work today. 

Hustle while you wait. 

Maintain a positive attitude. 

Keep a sense of humor. 

Be orderly in person and in work. 

Do not fear mistakes — fear only the absence of creative, constructive, 

and corrective responses to those mistakes. 
Facilitate the success of subordinates. 
Listen twice as much as you speak. 



p 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 107 

Concentrate all abilities and efforts on the task at hand, not worrying 
about the next job or promotion. 

A woman seeking to balance family and work values has 
expressed her sense of personal mission differently: 

I will seek to balance career and family as best I can since both are 
important to me. 

My home will be a place where I and my family, friends, and 
guests find joy, comfort, peace, and happiness. Still I will seek to 
create a clean and orderly environment, yet livable and comfortable. 
I will exercise wisdom in what we choose to eat, read, see, and do 
at home. I especially want to teach my children to love, to learn, and 
to laugh — and to work and develop their unique talents. 

I value the rights, freedoms, and responsibilities of our democratic 
society. I will be a concerned and informed citizen, involved in the 
political process to ensure my voice is heard and my vote is counted. 

I will be a self-starting individual who exercises initiative in 
accomplishing my life's goals. I will act on situations and opportu- 
nities, rather than to be acted upon. 

I will always try to keep myself free from addictive and destructive 
habits. I will develop habits that free me from old labels and limits 
and expand my capabilities and choices. 

My money will be my servant, not my master. I will seek financial 
independence over time. My wants will be subject to my needs and 
my means. Except for long-term home and car loans, I will seek to 
keep myself free from consumer debt. I will spend less than I earn 
and regularly save or invest part of my income. 

Moreover, I will use what money and talents I have to make life 
more enjoyable for others through service and charitable giving. 

You could call a personal mission statement a personal consti- 
tution. Like the United States Constitution, it's fundamentally 
changeless. In over two hundred years, there have been only 
twenty-six amendments, ten of which were in the original Bill of 
Rights. 

The United States Constitution is the standard by which every 
law in the country is evaluated. It is the document the president 
agrees to defend and support when he takes the Oath of Alle- 
giance. It is the criterion by which people are admitted into 
citizenship. It is the foundation and the center that enables people 
to ride through such major traumas as the Civil War, Vietnam, or 



108 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Watergate. It is the written standard, the key criterion by w^hich 
everything else is evaluated and directed. 

The Constitution has endured and serves its vital function today 
because it is based on correct principles, on the self-evident truths 
contained in the Declaration of Independence. These principles 
empower the Constitution with a timeless strength, even in the 
midst of social ambiguity and change. "Our peculiar security," 
said Thomas Jefferson, "is in the possession of a written Constitu- 
tion." 

A personal mission statement based on correct principles 
becomes the same kind of standard for an individual. It becomes 
a personal constitution, the basis for making major, life-directing 
decisions, the basis for making daily decisions in the midst of the 
circumstances and emotions that affect our lives. It empowers 
individuals with the same timeless strength in the midst of 
change. 

People can't live with change if there's not a changeless core 
inside them. The key to the ability to change is a changeless sense 
of who you are, what you are about and what you value. 

With a mission statement, we can flow with changes. We don't 
need prejudgments or prejudices. We don't need to figure out 
everything else in life, to stereotype and categorize everything and 
everybody in order to accommodate reality. 

Our personal environment is also changing at an ever-increasing 
pace. Such rapid change burns out a large number of people who 
feel they can hardly handle it, can hardly cope with life. They 
become reactive and essentially give up, hoping that the things 
that happen to them will be good. 

But it doesn't have to be that way. In the Nazi death camps 
where Victor Frankl learned the principle of proactivity, he also 
learned the importance of purpose, of meaning in life. The essence 
of "logotherapy," the philosophy he later developed and taught, is 
that many so-called mental and emotional illnesses are really 
symptoms of an underlying sense of meaninglessness or empti- 
ness. Logotherapy eliminates that emptiness by helping the indi- 
vidual to detect his unique meaning, his mission in life. 

Once you have that sense of mission, you have the essence of 
your own proactivity. You have the vision and the values which 
direct your life. You have the basic direction from which you set 
your long- and short-term goals. You have the power of a written 
constitution based on correct principles, against which every 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 109 

decision concerning the most effective use of your time, your 
talents, and your energies can be effectively measured. 

At the Center 

In order to write a personal mission statement, we must begin at 
the very center of our Circle of Influence, that center comprised of 
our most basic paradigms, the lens through which we see the 

world. 

It is here that we deal with our vision and our values. It is here 
that we use our endowment of self-awareness to examine our 
maps and, if we value correct principles, to make certain that our 
maps accurately describe the territory, that our paradigms are 
based on principles and reality. It is here that we use our 
endowment of conscience as a compass to help us detect our own 
unique talents and areas of contribution. It is here that we use our 
endowment of imagination to mentally create the end we desire, 
giving direction and purpose to our beginnings and providing the 
substance of a written personal constitution. 

It is also here that our focused efforts achieve the greatest results. 
As we work within the very center of our Circle of Influence, we 
expand it. This is highest leverage PC work, significantly impacting 
the effectiveness of every aspect of our lives. 

Whatever is at the center of our life will be the source of our 
security, guidance, wisdom, and power. 

Security represents your sense of worth, your identity, your 
emotional anchorage, your self-esteem, your basic personal 
strength or lack of it. 

Guidance means your source of direction in life. Encompassed by 
your map, your internal frame of reference that interprets for you 
what is happening out there, are standards or principles or implicit 
criteria that govern moment by moment decision-making and 

doing. 

Wisdom is your perspective on life, your sense of balance, your 
understanding of how the various parts and principles apply and 
relate to each other. It embraces judgment, discernment, compre- 
hension. It is a gestalt or oneness, an integrated wholeness. 

Power is the faculty or capacity to act, the strength and potency 
to accomplish something. It is the vital energy to make choices and 
decisions. It also includes the capacity to overcome deeply embed- 
ded habits and to cultivate higher, more effective ones. 



110 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



Seciirity 



Wisdom 1 CENTER 1 Guidance 



Power 



These four factors — security, guidance, wisdom, and power — 
are interdependent. Security and clear guidance bring true wis- 
dom, and wisdom becomes the spark or catalyst to release and 
direct power. When these four factors are present together, har- 
monized and enlivened by each other, they create the great force of 
a noble personality, a balanced character, a beautifully integrated 
individual. 

These life-support factors also undergird every other dimension 
of life. And none of them is an all-or-nothing matter. The degree to 
which you have developed each one could be charted somewhere 
on a continuum, much like the maturity continuum described 
earlier. At the bottom end, the four factors are weak. You are 
basically dependent on circumstances or other people, things over 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 111 

which you have no direct control. At the top end you are in 
control. You have independent strength and the foundation for 
rich, interdependent relationships. 

Your security lies somewhere on the continuum between extreme 
insecurity on one end, wherein your life is buffeted by all the fickle 
forces that play upon it, and a deep sense of high intrinsic worth 
and personal security on the other end. Your guidance ranges 
on the continuum from dependence on the social mirror or 
other unstable, fluctuating sources to strong inner direction. Your 
wisdom falls somewhere between a totally inaccurate map where 
everything is distorted and nothing seems to fit, and a complete 
and accurate map of life wherein all the parts and principles 
are properly related to each other. Your power lies somewhere 
between immobilization or being a puppet pulled by someone 
else's strings to high proactivity, the power to act according to your 
own values instead of being acted upon by other people and 
circumstances. 

The location of these factors on the continuum, the resulting 
degree of their integration, harmony, and balance, and their 
positive impact on every aspect of your life is a function of your 
center, the basic paradigms at your very core. 

Alternative Centers 

Each of us has a center, though we usually don't recognize it as 
such. Neither do we recognize the all-encompassing effects of that 
center on every aspect of our lives. 

Let's briefly examine several centers or core paradigms people 
typically have for a better understanding of how they affect these 
four fundamental dimensions and, ultimately, the sum of life that 
flows from them. 

Spouse Centeredness. Marriage can be the most intimate, the most 
satisfying, the most enduring, growth-producing of human rela- 
tionships. It might seem natural and proper to be centered on one's 
husband or wife. 

But experience and observation tell a different story. Over the 
years, I have been involved in working with many troubled 
marriages, and I have observed a certain thread weaving itself 
through almost every spouse-centered relationship I have en- 
countered. That thread is strong emotional dependence. 

If our sense of emotional worth comes primarily from our 



112 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

marriage, then we become highly dependent upon that relation- 
ship. We become vulnerable to the moods and feehngs, the 
behavior and treatment of our spouse, or to any external event that 
may impinge on the relationship — a nev^ child, in-law^s, economic 
setbacks, social successes, and so forth. 

When responsibilities increase and stresses come in the mar- 
riage, w^e tend to revert to the scripts we w^ere given as we were 
growing up. But so does our spouse. And those scripts are usually 
different. Different ways of handling financial, child discipline, or 
in-law issues come to the surface. When these deep-seated ten- 
dencies combine with the emotional dependency in the marriage, 
the spouse-centered relationship reveals all its vulnerability. 

When we are dependent on the person with whom we are in 
conflict, both need and conflict are compounded. Love-hate over- 
reactions, fight-or-flight tendencies, withdrawal, aggressiveness, 
bitterness, resentment, and cold competition are some of the usual 
results. When these occur, we tend to fall even further back on 
background tendencies and habits in an effort to justify and defend 
our own behavior and we attack our spouse's. 

Inevitably, anytime we are too vulnerable we feel the need to 
protect ourselves from further wounds. So we resort to sarcasm, 
cutting humor, criticism — anything that will keep from exposing 
the tenderness within. Each partner tends to wait on the initiative 
of the other for love, only to be disappointed but also confirmed as 
to the rightness of the accusations made. 

There is only phantom security in such a relationship when all 
appears to be going well. Guidance is based on the emotion of the 
moment. Wisdom and power are lost in the counterdependent 
negative interactions. 

Family Centeredness. Another common center is the family. This, 
too, may seem to be natural and proper. As an area of focus and 
deep investment, it provides great opportunities for deep relation- 
ships, for loving, for sharing, for much that makes life worthwhile. 
But as a center, it ironically destroys the very elements necessary to 
family success. 

People who are family-centered get their sense of security or 
personal worth from the family tradition and culture or the family 
reputation. Thus, they become vulnerable to any changes in that 
tradition or culture and to any influences that would affect that 
reputation. 

Family-centered parents do not have the emotional freedom, the 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 113 

power, to raise their children with their ultimate welfare truly in 
mind. If they derive their own security from the family, their need 
to be popular with their children may override the importance of a 
long-term investment in their children's growth and development. 
Or they may be focused on the proper and correct behavior of the 
moment. Any behavior that they consider improper threatens their 
security. They become upset, guided by the emotions of the 
moment, spontaneously reacting to the immediate concern rather 
than the long-term growth and development of the child. They 
may yell or scream. They may overreact and punish out of bad 
temper. They tend to love their children conditionally, making 
them emotionally dependent or counterdependent and rebellious. 

Money Centeredness. Another logical and extremely common center 
to people's lives is making money. Economic security is basic to 
one's opportunity to do much in any other dimension. In a 
hierarchy or continuum of needs, physical survival and financial 
security comes first. Other needs are not even activated until that 
basic need is satisfied, at least minimally. 

Most of us face economic worries. Many forces in the wider 
culture can and do act upon our economic situation, causing or 
threatening such disruption that we often experience concern and 
worry that may not always rise to the conscious surface. 

Sometimes there are apparently noble reasons given for making 
money, such as the desire to take care of one's family. And these 
things are important. But to focus on money-making as a center 
will bring about its own undoing. 

Consider again the four life-support factors — security, guidance, 
wisdom, and power. Suppose I derive much of my security from 
my employment or from my income or net worth. Since many 
factors affect these economic foundations, I become anxious and 
uneasy, protective and defensive, about anything that may affect 
them. When my sense of personal worth comes from my net 
worth, I am vulnerable to anything that will affect that net worth. 
But work and money, per se, provide no wisdom, no guidance, 
and only a limited degree of power and security. All it takes to 
show the limitations of a money center is a crisis in my life or in the 
life of a loved one. 

Money-centered people often put aside family or other priorities, 
assuming everyone will understand that economic demands come 
first. I know one father who was leaving with his children for a 
promised trip to the circus when a phone call came for him to come 



114 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

to work instead. He declined. When his wife suggested that 
perhaps he should have gone to work, he responded, "The w^ork 
will come again, but childhood won't." For the rest of their lives 
his children remembered this little act of priority setting, not only 
as an object lesson in their minds but as an expression of love in 
their hearts. 

Work Centeredness. A work-centered person may be a "worka- 
holic," driving himself to produce at the sacrifice of health, 
relationships, and other important areas of his life. His fundamen- 
tal identity comes from his work — "I'm a doctor," "I'm a writer," 
"I'm an actor." 

Because his identity, his sense of self-worth, is wrapped up in 
his work, his security is vulnerable to anything that happens to 
prevent him from continuing in it. His guidance is a function of the 
demands of the work. His wisdom and power come in the limited 
areas of his work, rendering him ineffective in other areas of life. 

Possession Centeredness. A driving force of many people is 
possessions — not only tangible, material possessions such as fash- 
ionable clothes, homes, cars, boats, and jewelry, but also the 
intangible possessions of fame, glory, or social prominence. Most 
of us are aware, through our own experience, how singularly 
flawed such a center is, simply because it can vanish rapidly and it 
is influenced by so many forces. 

If my sense of security lies in my reputation or in the things I have, 
my life will be in a constant state of threat and jeopardy that these 
possessions may be lost or stolen or devalued. If I'm in the presence 
of someone of greater net worth or fame or status, I feel inferior. If 
I'm in the presence of someone of lesser net worth or fame or status, 
I feel superior. My sense of self-worth constantly fluctuates. I don't 
have any sense of constancy or anchorage or persistent selfhood. I 
am constantly trying to protect and insure my assets, properties, 
securities, position, or reputation. We have all heard stories of 
people committing suicide after losing their fortunes in a significant 
stock decline or their fame in a political reversal. 

Pleasure Centeredness. Another common center, closely allied with 
possessions, is that of fun and pleasure. We live in a world where 
instant gratification is available and encouraged. Television and 
movies are major influences in increasing people's expectations. 
They graphically portray what other people have and can do in 
living the life of ease and "fun." 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 115 

But while the glitter of pleasure-centered life-styles is graphically 
portrayed, the natural result of such life-styles — the impact on the 
inner person, on productivity, on relationships — is seldom accu- 
rately seen. 

Innocent pleasures in moderation can provide relaxation for the 
body and mind and can foster family and other relationships. But 
pleasure, per se, offers no deep, lasting satisfaction or sense of 
fulfillment. The pleasure-centered person, too soon bored with 
each succeeding level of "fun," constantly cries for more and more. 
So the next new pleasure has to be bigger and better, more 
exciting, with a bigger "high." A person in this state becomes 
almost entirely narcissistic, interpreting all of life in terms of the 
pleasure it provides to the self here and now. 

Too many vacations that last too long, too many movies, too 
much TV, too much video game playing, too much undisciplined 
leisure time in which a person continually takes the course of least 
resistance gradually waste a life. They ensure that a person's 
capacities stay dormant, that talents remain undeveloped, that the 
mind and spirit become lethargic and that the heart is unfulfilled. 
Where is the security, the guidance, the wisdom, and the power? 
At the low end of the continuum, in the pleasure of a fleeting 
moment. 

Malcolm Muggeridge writes "A Twentieth-Century Testimony": 

When I look back on my life nowadays, which I sometimes do, 
what strikes me most forcibly about it is that what seemed at the 
time most significant and seductive, seems now most futile and 
absurd. For instance, success in all of its various guises; being 
known and being praised; ostensible pleasures, like acquiring 
money or seducing women, or traveling, going to and fro in the 
world and up and down in it like Satan, explaining and experiencing 
whatever Vanity Fair has to offer. 

In retrospect, all these exercises in self-gratification seem pure 
fantasy, what Pascal called, "licking the earth." 

Friend/Enemy Centeredness. Young people are particularly, though 
certainly not exclusively, susceptible to becoming friend-centered. 
Acceptance and belonging to a peer group can become almost 
supremely important. The distorted and ever-changing social 
mirror becomes the source for the four life-support factors, creating 
a high degree of dependence on the fluctuating moods, feelings, 
attitudes, and behavior of others. 
Friend centeredness can also focus exclusively on one person. 



116 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

taking on some of the dimensions of marriage. The emotional 
dependence on one individual, the escalating need/conflict spiral, 
and the resulting negative interactions can grov;^ out of friend 
centeredness. 

And what about putting an enemy at the center of one's life? Most 
people would never think of it, and probably no one would ever do 
it consciously. Nevertheless, enemy centering is very common, 
particularly when there is frequent interaction between people 
who are in real conflict. When someone feels he has been unjustly 
dealt with by an emotionally or socially significant person, it is very 
easy for him to become preoccupied with the injustice and make 
the other person the center of his life. Rather than proactively 
leading his own life, the enemy-centered person is counterde- 
pendently reacting to the behavior and attitudes of a perceived 
enemy. 

One friend of mine who taught at a university became very 
distraught because of the weaknesses of a particular administrator 
with whom he had a negative relationship. He allowed himself to 
think about the man constantly until eventually it became an 
obsession. It so preoccupied him that it affected the quality of his 
relationships with his family, his church, and his working associ- 
ates. He finally came to the conclusion that he had to leave the 
university and accept a teaching appointment somewhere else. 

"Wouldn't you really prefer to teach at this university, if the man 
were not here?" I asked him. 

"Yes, I would," he responded. "But as long as he is here, then 
my staying is too disruptive to everything in life. I have to go." 

"Why have you made this administrator the center of your hfe?" 
I asked him. 

He was shocked by the question. He denied it. But I pointed out 
to him that he was allowing one individual and his weaknesses to 
distort his entire map of life, to undermine his faith and the quality 
of his relationships with his loved ones. 

He finally admitted that this individual had had such an impact 
on him, but he denied that he himself had made all these choices. 
He attributed the responsibility for the unhappy situation to the 
administrator. He, himself, he declared, was not responsible. 

As we talked, little by little, he came to realize that he was 
indeed responsible, but that because he did not handle this 
responsibility well, he was being irresponsible. 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 117 

Many divorced people fall into a similar pattern. They are still 
consumed with anger and bitterness and self-justification regard- 
ing an ex-spouse. In a negative sense, psychologically they are still 
married — they each need the weaknesses of the former partner to 
justify their accusations. 

Many "older" children go through life either secretly or openly 
hating their parents. They blame them for past abuses, neglect, or 
favoritism and they center their adult life on that hatred, living out 
the reactive, justifying script that accompanies it. 

The individual who is friend- or enemy-centered has no 
intrinsic security. Feelings of self-worth are volatile, a function of 
the emotional state or behavior of other people. Guidance comes 
from the person's perception of how others will respond, and 
wisdom is limited by the social lens or by an enemy-centered 
paranoia. The individual has no power. Other people are pulling 
the strings. 

Church Centeredness. I believe that almost anyone who is seriously 
involved in any church will recognize that churchgoing is not 
synonymous with personal spirituality. There are some people 
who get so busy in church worship and projects that they become 
insensitive to the pressing human needs that surround them, 
contradicting the very precepts they profess to believe deeply. 
There are others who attend church less frequently or not at all but 
whose attitudes and behavior reflect a more genuine centering in 
the principles of the basic Judeo-Christian ethic. 

Having participated throughout my life in organized church and 
community service groups, I have found that attending church 
does not necessarily mean living the principles taught in those 
meetings. You can be active in a church but inactive in its gospel. 

In the church-centered life, image or appearance can become a 
person's dominant consideration, leading to hypocrisy that under- 
mines personal security and intrinsic worth. Guidance comes from 
a social conscience, and the church-centered person tends to label 
others artificially in terms of "active," "inactive," "liberal," "or- 
thodox," or "conservative." 

Because the church is a formal organization made up of policies, 
programs, practices, and people, it cannot by itself give a person any 
deep, permanent security or sense of intrinsic worth. Living the 
principles taught by the church can do this, but the organization 
alone cannot. 

Nor can the church give a person a constant sense of guidance. 



118 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Church-centered people often tend to live in compartments, acting 
and thinking and feeling in certain ways on the Sabbath and in 
totally different ways on weekdays. Such a lack of wholeness or 
unity or integrity is a further threat to security, creating the need 
for increased labeling and self-justifying. 

Seeing the church as an end rather than as a means to an end 
undermines a person's wisdom and sense of balance. Although the 
church claims to teach people about the source of power, it does 
not claim to be that power itself. It claims to be one vehicle through 
which divine power can be channeled into man's nature. 

Self-Centeredness. Perhaps the most common center today is the 
self. The most obvious form is selfishness, which violates the values 
of most people. But if we look closely at many of the popular 
approaches to growth and self-fulfillment, we often find self- 
centering at their core. 

There is little security, guidance, wisdom, or power in the 
limited center of self. Like the Dead Sea in Palestine, it accepts but 
never gives. It becomes stagnant. 

On the other hand, paying attention to the development of self 
in the greater perspective of improving one's ability to serve, to 
produce, to contribute in meaningful ways, gives context for 
dramatic increase in the four life-support factors. 

These are some of the more common centers from which people 
approach life. It is often much easier to recognize the center in 
someone else's life than to see it in your own. You probably know 
someone who puts making money ahead of everything else. You 
probably know someone whose energy is devoted to justifying 
his or her position in an ongoing negative relationship. If you 
look, you can sometimes see beyond behavior into the center that 
creates it. 

Identifying Your Center 

But where do you stand? What is at the center of your own life? 
Sometimes that isn't easy to see. 

Perhaps the best way to identify your own center is to look 
closely at your life-support factors. If you can identify with one or 
more of the descriptions below, you can trace it back to the center 
from which it flows, a center which may be limiting your personal 
effectiveness. 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 

[something deleted]

122 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

More often than not, a person's center is some combination of 
these and/or other centers. Most people are very much a function 
of a variety of influences that play upon their lives. Depending on 
external or internal conditions, one particular center may be 
activated until the underlying needs are satisfied. Then another 
center becomes the compelling force. 

As a person fluctuates from one center to another, the resulting 
relativism is like roller coasting through life. One moment you're 
high, the next moment you're low, making efforts to compensate 
for one weakness by borrowing strength from another weakness. 
There is no consistent sense of direction, no persistent wisdom, no 
steady power supply or sense of personal, intrinsic worth and 
identity. 

The ideal, of course, is to create one clear center from which you 
consistently derive a high degree of security, guidance, wisdom, 
and power, empowering your proactivity and giving congruency 
and harmony to every part of your life. 

A Principle Center 

By centering our lives on correct principles, we create a solid 
foundation for development of the four life-support factors. 

Our security comes from knowing that, unlike other centers 
based on people or things which are subject to frequent and 
immediate change, correct principles do not change. We can 
depend on them. 

Principles don't react to anything. They don't get mad and treat 
us differently. They won't divorce us or run away with our best 
friend. They aren't out to get us. They can't pave our way with 
shortcuts and quick fixes. They don't depend on the behavior of 
others, the environment, or the current fad for their validity. 
Principles don't die. They aren't here one day and gone the next. 
They can't be destroyed by fire, earthquake or theft. 

Principles are deep, fundamental truths, classic truths, generic 
common denominators. They are tightly interwoven threads run- 
ning with exactness, consistency, beauty, and strength through 
the fabric of life. 

Even in the midst of people or circumstances that seem to ignore 
the principles, we can be secure in the knowledge that principles 
are bigger than people or circumstances, and that thousands of 
years of history have seen them triumph, time and time again. 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 123 

Even more important, we can be secure in the knowledge that we 
can validate them in our own lives, by our own experience. 

Admittedly, we're not omniscient. Our knowledge and under- 
standing of correct principles is limited by our own lack of 
awareness of our true nature and the world around us and by the 
flood of trendy philosophies and theories that are not in harmony 
with correct principles. These ideas will have their season of 
acceptance, but, like many before them, they won't endure because 
they're built on false foundations. 

We are limited, but we can push back the borders of our 
limitations. An understanding of the principle of our own growth 
enables us to search out correct principles with the confidence that 
the more we learn, the more clearly we can focus the lens through 
which we see the world. The principles don't change; our under- 
standing of them does. 

The wisdom and guidance that accompany principle-centered 
living come from correct maps, from the way things really are, 
have been, and will be. Correct maps enable us to clearly see where 
we want to go and how to get there. We can make our decisions 
using the correct data that will make their implementation possible 
and meaningful. 

The personal power that comes from principle-centered living is 
the power of a self-aware, knowledgeable, proactive individual, 
unrestricted by the attitudes, behaviors, and actions of others or by 
many of the circumstances and environmental influences that limit 
other people. 

The only real limitation of power is the natural consequences of 
the principles themselves. We are free to choose our actions, based 
on our knowledge of correct principles, but we are not free to 
choose the consequences of those actions. Remember, "If you pick 
up one end of the stick, you pick up the other." 

Principles always have natural consequences attached to them. 
There are positive consequences when we live in harmony with the 
principles. There are negative consequences when we ignore 
them. But because these principles apply to everyone, whether or 
not they are aware, this limitation is universal. And the more we 
know of correct principles, the greater is our personal freedom to 
act wisely. 

By centering our lives on timeless, unchanging principles, we 
create a fundamental paradigm of effective living. It is the center 
that puts all other centers in perspective. 



124 



THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

[something deleted]


HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 



125 




Remember that your paradigm is the source from which your 
attitudes and behaviors flow. A paradigm is like a pair of glasses; 
it affects the way you see everything in your life. If you look at 
things through the paradigm of correct principles, what you see in 
life is dramatically different from what you see through any other 
centered paradigm. 

I have included in the Appendix section of this book a detailed 
chart which shows how each center we've discussed might possi- 
bly affect the way you see everything else.* But for a quick 
understanding of the difference your center makes, let's look at 
just one example of a specific problem as seen through the different 
paradigms. As you read, try to put on each pair of glasses. Try to 
feel the response that flows from the different centers. 



Please refer to Appendix A. 



126 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Suppose tonight you have invited your w^ife to go to a concert. 
You have the tickets; she's excited about going. It's four o'clock in 
the afternoon. 

All of a sudden, your boss calls you into his office and says he 
needs your help through the evening to get ready for an important 
meeting at 9 a.m. tomorrow^. 

If you're looking through spouse-centered or family-centered 
glasses, your main concern will be your wiie. You may tell the boss 
you can't stay and you take her to the concert in an effort to please 
her. You may feel you have to stay to protect your job, but you'll 
do so grudgingly, anxious about her response, trying to justify 
your decision and protect yourself from her disappointment or 
anger. 

If you're looking through a money-centered lens, your main 
thought will be of the overtime you'll get or the influence working 
late will have on a potential raise. You may call your wife and 
simply tell her you have to stay, assuming she'll understand that 
economic demands come first. 

If you're work-centered, you may be thinking of the opportunity. 
You can learn more about the job. You can make some points with 
the boss and further your career. You may give yourself a pat on 
the back for putting in hours well beyond what is required, 
evidence of what a hard worker you are. Your wife should be 
proud of you! 

If you're possession-centered, you might be thinking of the things 
the overtime income could buy. Or you might consider what an 
asset to your reputation at the office it would be if you stayed. 
Everyone would hear tomorrow how noble, how sacrificing and 
dedicated you are. 

If you're pleasured-centered, you'll probably can the work and go 
to the concert, even if your wife would be happy for you to work 
late. You deserve a night out! 

If you're friend-centered, your decision would be influenced by 
whether or not you had invited friends to attend the concert with 
you. Or whether your friends at work were going to stay late, too. 

If you're enemy -centered, you may stay late because you know it 
will give you a big edge over that person in the office who thinks 
he's the company's greatest asset. While he's off having fun, you'll 
be working and slaving, doing his work and yours, sacrificing your 
personal pleasure for the good of the company he can so blithely 
ignore. 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 127 

If you're church-centered, you might be influenced by plans other 
church members have to attend the concert, by whether or not any 
church members work at your office, or by the nature of the 
concert — Handel's Messiah might rate higher priority than a rock 
concert. Your decision might also be affected by what you think a 
"good church member" would do and by whether you view the 
extra work as "service" or "seeking after material wealth." 

If you're self-centered, you'll be focused on what will do you the 
most good. Would it be better for you to go out for the evening? Or 
would it be better for you to make a few points with the boss? How 
the different options affect you will be your main concern. 

As we consider various ways of looking at a single event, is it 
any wonder that we have "young lady/old lady" perception 
problems in our interactions with each other? Can you see how 
fundamentally our centers affect us? Right down to our motiva- 
tions, our daily decisions, our actions (or, in too many cases, our 
reactions), our interpretations of events? That's why understanding 
your own center is so important. And if that center does not 
empower you as a proactive person, it becomes fundamental to 
your effectiveness to make the necessary paradigm shifts to create 
a center that will. 

As a principle-centered person, you try to stand apart from the 
emotion of the situation and from other factors that would act on 
you, and evaluate the options. Looking at the balanced whole — the 
work needs, the family needs, other needs that may be involved 
and the possible implications of the various alternative decisions — 
you'll try to come up with the best solution, taking all factors into 
consideration. 

Whether you go to the concert or stay and work is really a small 
part of an effective decision. You might make the same choice with 
a number of other centers. But there are several important differ- 
ences when you are coming from a principle-centered paradigm. 

First, you are not being acted upon by other people or circum- 
stances. You are proactively choosing what you determine to be 
the best alternative. You make your decision consciously and 
knowledgeably. 

Second, you know your decision is most effective because it is 
based on principles with predictable long-term results. 

Third, what you choose to do contributes to your ultimate values 
in life. Staying at work to get the edge on someone at the office is 



128 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

an entirely different evening in your life from staying because you 
value your boss's effectiveness and you genuinely want to contrib- 
ute to the company's w^elfare. The experiences you have as you 
carry out your decisions take on quality and meaning in the context 
of your life as a w^hole. 

Fourth, you can communicate to your wife and your boss within 
the strong networks you've created in your interdependent rela- 
tionships. Because you are independent, you can be effectively 
interdependent. You might decide to delegate what is delegable 
and come in early the next morning to do the rest. 

And finally, you'll feel comfortable about your decision. What- 
ever you choose to do, you can focus on it and enjoy it. 

As a principle-centered person, you see things differently. And 
because you see things differently, you think differently, you act 
differently. Because you have a high degree of security, guidance, 
wisdom, and power that flows from a solid, unchanging core, you 
have the foundation of a highly proactive and highly effective life. 

Writing and Using a Personal Mission Statement 

As we go deeply within ourselves, as we understand and realign 
our basic paradigms to bring them in harmony with correct 
principles, we create both an effective, empowering center and 
a clear lens through which we can see the world. We can then 
focus that lens on how we, as unique individuals, relate to that 
world. 

Frankl says we detect rather than invent our missions in life. I like 
that choice of words. I think each of us has an internal monitor or 
sense, a conscience, that gives us an awareness of our own unique- 
ness and the singular contributions that we can make. In Frankl' s 
words, "Everyone has his own specific vocation or mission in 
life. . . . Therein he cannot be replaced, nor can his life be 
repeated. Thus, everyone's task is as unique as is his specific 
opportunity to implement it." 

In seeking to give verbal expression to that uniqueness, we are 
again reminded of the fundamental importance of proactivity and 
of working within our Circle of Influence. To seek some abstract 
meaning to our lives out in our Circle of Concern is to abdicate our 
proactive reponsibility, to place our own first creation in the hands 
of circumstance and other people. 

Our meaning comes from within. Again, in the words of Frankl, 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 129 

"Ultimately, man should not ask what the meaning of his life is, 
but rather must recognize that it is he who is asked. In a word, 
each man is questioned by life; and he can only answer to life by 
answering for his own life; to life he can only respond by being 
responsible." 

Personal responsibility, or proactivity, is fundamental to the first 
creation. Returning to the computer metaphor. Habit 1 says "You 
are the programmer." Habit 2, then, says, "Write the program." 
Until you accept the idea that you are responsible, that you are the 
programmer, you won't really invest in writing the program. 

As proactive people, we can begin to give expression to what we 
want to be and to do in our lives. We can write a personal mission 
statement, a personal constitution. 

A mission statement is not something you write overnight. It 
takes deep introspection, careful analysis, thoughtful expression, 
and often many rewrites to produce it in final form. It may take you 
several weeks or even months before you feel really comfortable 
with it, before you feel it is a complete and concise expression of 
your innermost values and directions. Even then, you will want to 
review it regularly and make minor changes as the years bring 
additional insights or changing circumstances. 

But fundamentally, your mission statement becomes your con- 
stitution, the solid expression of your vision and values. It becomes 
the criterion by which you measure everything else in your life. 

I recently finished reviewing my own mission statement, which 
I do fairly regularly. Sitting on the edge of a beach, alone, at the 
end of a bicycle ride, I took out my organizer and hammered it out. 
It took several hours, but I felt a sense of clarity, a sense of 
organization and commitment, a sense of exhilaration and free- 
dom. 

I find the process is as important as the product. Writing or 
reviewing a mission statement changes you because it forces you to 
think through your priorities deeply, carefully, and to align your 
behavior with your beliefs. As you do, other people begin to sense 
that you're not being driven by everything that happens to you. 
You have a sense of mission about what you're trying to do and 
vou are excited about it.* 



* If you would like to see some additional examples of mission statements or if you would 
like a worksheet to help you develop your own, please call 1-800-255-0777. There is no cost 
to you. 



130 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Using Your Whole Brain 

Our self-aw^areness empowers us to examine our own thoughts. 
This is particularly helpful in creating a personal mission statement 
because the two unique human endowments that enable us to 
practice Habit 2 — imagination and conscience — are primarily func- 
tions of the right side of the brain. Understanding how to tap into 
that right brain capacity greatly increases our first creation ability. 

A great deal of research has been conducted for decades on what 
has come to be called brain dominance theory. The findings 
basically indicate that each hemisphere of the brain — left and 
right — tends to specialize in and preside over different functions, 
process different kinds of information, and deal with different 
kinds of problems. 

Essentially, the left hemisphere is the more logical/verbal one 
and the right hemisphere the more intuitive, creative one. The left 
deals with words, the right with pictures; the left with parts and 
specifics, the right with wholes and the relationship between the 
parts. The left deals with analysis, which means to break apart; the 
right with synthesis, which means to put together. The left deals 
with sequential thinking; the right with simultaneous and holistic 
thinking. The left is time bound; the right is time free. 

Although people use both sides of the brain, one side or the 
other generally tends to be dominant in each individual. Of course, 
the ideal would be to cultivate and develop the ability to have good 
crossover between both sides of the brain so that a person could 
first sense what the situation called for and then use the appropri- 
ate tool to deal with it. But people tend to stay in the "comfort 
zone" of their dominant hemisphere and process every situation 
according to either a right or left brain preference. 

In the words of Abraham Maslow, "He that is good with a 
hammer tends to think everything is a nail." This is another factor 
that affects the "young lady/old lady" perception difference. Right 
brain and left brain people tend to look at things in different ways. 

We live in a primarily left brain-dominant world, where words 
and measurement and logic are enthroned, and the more creative, 
intuitive, sensing, artistic aspect of our nature is often subordi- 
nated. Many of us find it more difficult to tap into our right brain 
capacity. 

Admittedly this description is oversimplified and new studies 
will undoubtedly throw more light on brain functioning. But the 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 131 

point here is that we are capable of performing many different 
kinds of thought processes and we barely tap our potential. As we 
become aware of its different capacities, we can consciously use 
our minds to meet specific needs in more effective ways. 

Two Ways to Tap the Right Brain 

If we use the brain dominance theory as a model, it becomes 
evident that the quality of our first creation is significantly impacted 
by our ability to use our creative right brain. The more we are able 
to draw upon our right brain capacity, the more fully we will be 
able to visualize, to synthesize, to transcend time and present 
circumstances, to project a holistic picture of what we want to do 
and to be in life. 

Expand Perspective 

Sometimes we are knocked out of our left brain environment and 
thought patterns and into the right brain by an unplanned expe- 
rience. The death of a loved one, a severe illness, a financial 
setback, or extreme adversity can cause us to stand back, look at 
our lives, and ask ourselves some hard questions: "What's really 
important? Why am I doing what I'm doing?" 

But if you're proactive, you don't have to wait for circumstances 
or other people to create perspective expanding experiences. You 
can consciously create your own. 

There are a number of ways to do this. Through the powers of 
your imagination, you can visualize your own funeral, as we did at 
the beginning of this chapter. Write your own eulogy. Actually 
write it out. Be specific. 

You can visualize your twenty-fifth and then your fiftieth 
wedding anniversary. Have your spouse visualize this with you. 
Try to capture the essence of the family relationship you want to 
have created through your day-by-day investment over a period of 
that many years. 

You can visualize your retirement from your present occupation. 
What contributions, what achievements will you want to have 
made in your field? What plans will you have after retirement? Will 
you enter a second career? 

Expand your mind. Visualize in rich detail. Involve as many 
emotions and feehngs as possible. Involve as many of the senses as 
you can. 

I have done similar visualization exercises with some of my 



132 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

university classes. "Assume you only have this one semester to 
live," I tell my students, "and that during this semester you are to 
stay in school as a good student. Visualize how you would spend 
your semester." 

Things are suddenly placed in a different perspective. Values 
quickly surface that before weren't even recognized. 

I have also asked students to live with that expanded perspective 
for a week and keep a diary of their experiences. 

The results are very revealing. They start writing to parents to 
tell them how much they love and appreciate them. They reconcile 
with a brother, a sister, a friend where the relationship has 
deteriorated. ^ 

The dominant, central theme of their activities, the underlying 
principle, is love. The futility of bad-mouthing, bad thinking, 
put-downs, and accusation becomes very evident when they think 
in terms of having only a short time to live. Principles and values 
become more evident to everybody. 

There are a number of techniques using your imagination that 
can put you in touch with your values. But the net effect of every 
one I have ever used is the same. When people seriously undertake 
to identify what really matters most to them in their lives, what 
they really want to be and to do, they become very reverent. They 
start to think in larger terms than today and tomorrow. 

Visualization and Affirmation 

Personal leadership is not a singular experience. It doesn't begin 
and end with the writing of a personal mission statement. It is, 
rather, the ongoing process of keeping your vision and values 
before you and aligning your hfe to be congruent with those most 
important things. And in that effort, your powerful right brain 
capacity can be a great help to you on a daily basis as you work to 
integrate your personal mission statement into your life. It's 
another application of "begin with the end in mind." 

Let's go back to an example we mentioned before. Suppose I am 
a parent who really deeply loves my children. Suppose I identify 
that as one of my fundamental values in my personal mission 
statement. But suppose, on a daily basis, I have trouble overreact- 
ing. 

I can use my right brain power of visualization to write an 
"affirmation" that will help me become more congruent with my 
deeper values in my daily life. 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 133 

A good affirmation has five basic ingredients: it's personal, it's 
positive, it's present tense, it's visual, and it's emotional. So I might 
write something like this: "It is deeply satisfying (emotional) to me 
(personal) that I respond (present tense) with wisdom, love, 
firmness, and self-control (positive) when my children misbe- 
have." 

Then I can visualize it, I can spend a few minutes each day and 
totally relax my mind and body. I can think about situations in 
which my children might misbehave. I can visualize them in rich 
detail. I can feel the texture of the chair I might be sitting on, the 
floor under my feet, the sweater I'm wearing. I can see the dress 
my daughter has on, the expression on her face. The more clearly 
and vividly I can imagine the detail, the more deeply I will 
experience it, the less I will see it as a spectator. 

Then I can see her do something very specific which normally 
makes my heart pound and my temper start to flare. But instead of 
seeing my normal response, I can see myself handle the situation 
with all the love, the power, the self-control I have captured in my 
affirmation. I can write the program, write the script, in harmony 
with my values, with my personal mission statement. 

And if I do this, day after day my behavior will change. Instead 
of living out of the scripts given to me by my own parents or by 
society or by genetics or my environment, I will be living out of the 
script I have written from my own self-selected value system. 

I have used this affirmation process extensively with my own 
son, Sean, in his football career. We started when he played 
quarterback in high school, and eventually, I taught him how to do 
it on his own. 

We would try to get him in a very relaxed state of mind through 
deep breathing and a progressive muscle relaxation technique so 
that he became very quiet inside. Then I would help him visualize 
himself right in the heat of the toughest situations imaginable. 

He would imagine a big blitz coming at him fast. He had to read 
the blitz and respond. He would imagine giving audibles at the line 
after reading defenses. He would imagine quick reads with his first 
receiver, his second receiver, his third receiver. He would imagine 
options that he normally wouldn't do. 

At one point in his football career, he told me he was constantly 
getting uptight. As we talked, I realized that he was visualizing 
uptightness. So we worked on visualizing relaxation in the middle 



134 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

of the big pressure circumstance. We discovered that the nature of 
the visualization is very important. If you visualize the wrong 
thing, you'll produce the wrong thing. 

Dr. Charles Garfield has done extensive research on peak 
performers, both in athletics and in business. He became fascinated 
with peak performance in his work with the NASA program, 
watching the astronauts rehearse everything on earth, again and 
again in a simulated environment before they went to space. 
Although he had a doctorate in mathematics, he decided to go back 
and get another Ph.D. in the field of psychology and study the 
characteristics of peak performers. 

One of the main things his research showed was that almost all 
of the world-class athletes and other peak performers are visual- 
izers. They see it; they feel it; they experience it before they actually 
do it. They begin with the end in mind. 

You can do it in every area of your life. Before a performance, a 
sales presentation, a difficult confrontation, or the daily challenge 
of meeting a goal, see it clearly, vividly, relentlessly, over and over 
again. Create an internal "comfort zone." Then, when you get into 
the situation, it isn't foreign. It doesn't scare you. 

Your creative, visual right brain is one of your most important 
assets, both in creating your personal mission statement and in 
integrating it into your life. 

There is an entire body of literature and audio and video tapes 
that deals with this process of visualization and affirmation. Some 
of the more recent developments in this field include such things 
as subliminal programming, neurolinguistic programming, and 
new forms of relaxation and self- talk processes. These all involve 
explanation, elaboration and different packaging of the fundamen- 
tal principles of the first creation. 

My review of the success literature brought me in contact with 
hundreds of books on this subject. Although some made extrava- 
gant claims and relied on anecdotal rather than scientific evidence, 
I think that most of the material is fundamentally sound. The 
majority of it appears to have originally come out of the study of 
the Bible by many individuals. 

In effective personal leadership, visualization and affirmation 
techniques emerge naturally out of a foundation of well thought 
through purposes and principles that become the center of a 
person's life. They are extremely powerful in rescripting and 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 135 

reprogramming, into writing deeply committed-to purposes and 
principles into one's heart and mind. I believe that central to all 
enduring religions in society are the same principles and practices 
clothed in different language — meditation, prayer, covenants, or- 
dinances, scripture study, empathy, compassion, and many differ- 
ent forms of the use of both conscience and imagination. 

But if these techniques become part of the Personality Ethic and 
are severed from a base of character and principles, they can be 
misused and abused in serving other centers, primarily the center 
of self. 

Affirmation and visualization are forms of programming, and we 
must be certain that we do not submit ourselves to any program- 
ming that is not in harmony with our basic center or that comes 
from sources centered on money-making, self interest, or anything 
other than correct principles. 

The imagination can be used to achieve the fleeting success that 
comes when a person is focused on material gain or on "what's in 
it for me." But I believe the higher use of imagination is in 
harmony with the use of conscience to transcend self and create a 
life of contribution based on unique purpose and on the principles 
that govern interdependent reality. 

Identifying Roles and Goals 

Of course, the logical/verbal left brain becomes important also as 
you attempt to capture your right brain images, feelings, and 
pictures in the words of a written mission statement. Just as 
breathing exercises help integrate body and mind, writing is a kind 
of psycho-neural muscular activity which helps bridge and inte- 
grate the conscious and subconscious minds. Writing distills, 
crystallizes, and clarifies thought and helps break the whole into 
parts. 

We each have a number of different roles in our lives — different 
areas or capacities in which we have responsibihty. I may, for 
example, have a role as an individual, a husband, a father, a 
teacher, a church member, and a businessman. And each of these 
roles is important. 

One of the major problems that arises when people work to 
become more effective in life is that they don't think broadly 
enough. They lose the sense of proportion, the balance, the natural 
ecology necessary to effective living. They may get consumed by 



136 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

work and neglect personal health. In the name of professional 
success, they may neglect the most precious relationships in their 
lives. 

You may find that your mission statement will be much more 
balanced, much easier to work with, if you break it down into the 
specific role areas of your life and the goals you want to accomplish 
in each area. Look at your professional role. You might be a 
salesperson, or a manager, or a product developer. What are you 
about in that area? What are the values that should guide you? 
Think of your personal roles — husband, wife, father, mother, 
neighbor, friend. What are you about in those roles? What's 
important to you? Think of community roles — the political area, 
public service, volunteer organizations. 

One executive has used the idea of roles and goals to create the 
following mission statement: 

My mission is to live with integrity and to make a difference in the 
lives of others. 

To fulfill this mission: 

I have charity: I seek out and love the one — each one — regardless of 

his situation. 
I sacrifice: 1 devote my time, talents, and resources to my mission. 
I inspire: I teach by example that we are all children of a loving 

Heavenly Father and that every Goliath can be overcome. 
I am impactful: What 1 do makes a difference in the lives of others. 

These roles take priority in achieving my mission: 

Husband — my partner is the most important person in my life. 

Together we contiibute the fruits of harmony, industry, charity, 

and thrift. 
Father — 1 help my children experience progressively greater joy in 

their lives. 
Son/Brother — I am frequently "there" for support and love. 
Christian — God can count on me to keep my covenants and to serve 

his other children. 
Neighbor — The love of Christ is visible through my actions toward 

others. 
Change Agent — I am a catalyst for developing high performance in 

large organizations. 
Scholar — I learn important new things every day. 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 137 

Writing your mission in terms of the important roles in your life 
gives you balance and harmony. It keeps each role clearly before 
you. You can review your roles frequently to make sure that you 
don't get totally absorbed by one role to the exclusion of others that 
are equally or even more important in your life. 

After you identify your various roles, then you can think about 
the long-term goals you want to accomplish in each of those roles. 
We're into the right brain again, using imagination, creativity, 
conscience, and inspiration. If these goals are the extension of a 
mission statement based on correct principles, they will be vitally 
different from the goals people normally set. They will be in 
harmony with correct principles, with natural laws, which gives 
you greater power to achieve them. They are not someone else's 
goals you have absorbed. They are your goals. They reflect your 
deepest values, your unique talent, your sense of mission. And 
they grow out of your chosen roles in life. 

An effective goal focuses primarily on results rather than activity. 
It identifies where you want to be, and, in the process, helps you 
determine where you are. It gives you important information on 
how to get there, and it tells you when you have arrived. It unifies 
your efforts and energy. It gives meaning and purpose to all you 
do. And it can finally translate itself into daily activities so that you 
are proactive, you are in charge of your life, you are making 
happen each day the things that will enable you to fulfill your 
personal mission statement. 

Roles and goals give structure and organized direction to your 
personal mission. If you don't yet have a personal mission state- 
ment, it's a good place to begin. Just identifying the various areas 
of your life and the two or three important results you feel you 
should accomplish in each area to move ahead gives you an overall 
perspective of your hfe and a sense of direction. 

As we move into Habit 3, we'll go into greater depth in the area 
of short-term goals. The important application at this point is to 
identify roles and long-term goals as they relate to your personal 
mission statement. These roles and goals will provide the founda- 
tion for effective goal setting and achieving when we get to the 
Habit 3 day-to-day management of life and time. 

Family Mission Statements 

Because Habit 2 is based on principle, it has broad application. In 
addition to individuals, families, service groups, and organizations 



138 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

of all kinds become significantly more effective as they begin w^ith 
the end in mind. 

Many families are managed on the basis of crises, moods, quick 
fixes, and instant gratification — not on sound principles. Symp- 
toms surface w^henever stress and pressure mount: people become 
cynical, critical, or silent or they start yelling and overreacting. 
Children who observe these kinds of behavior grow up thinking 
the only way to solve problems is flight or fight. 

The core of any family is what is changeless, what is always 
going to be there — shared vision and values. By writing a family 
mission statement, you give expression to its true foundation. 

This mission statement becomes its constitution, the standard, 
the criterion for evaluation and decision making. It gives continuity 
and unity to the family as well as direction. When individual 
values are harmonized with those of the family, members work 
together for common purposes that are deeply felt. 

Again, the process is as important as the product. The very 
process of writing and refining a mission statement becomes a key 
way to improve the family. Working together to create a mission 
statement builds the PC capacity to live it. 

By getting input from every family member, drafting a state- 
ment, getting feedback, revising it, and using wording from 
different family members, you get the family talking, communicat- 
ing, on things that really matter deeply. The best mission state- 
ments are the result of family members coming together in a spirit 
of mutual respect, expressing their different views, and working 
together to create something greater than any one individual could 
do alone. Periodic review to expand perspective, shift emphasis or 
direction, amend or give new meaning to time-worn phrases can 
keep the family united in common values and purposes. 

The mission statement becomes the framework for thinking, for 
governing the family. When the problems and crises come, the 
constitution is there to remind family members of the things that 
matter most and to provide direction for problem solving and 
decision making based on correct principles. 

In our home, we put our mission statement up on a wall in the 
family room so that we can look at it and monitor ourselves daily. 

When we read the phrases about the sounds of love in our 
home, order, responsible independence, cooperation, helpfulness, 
meeting needs, developing talents, showing interest in each other's 
talents, and giving service to others it gives us some criteria to 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 139 

know how we're doing in the things that matter most to us as a 
family. 

When we plan our family goals and activities, we say, "In light 
of these principles, what are the goals we're going to work on? 
What are our action plans to accomphsh our goals and actualize 
these values?" 

We review the statement frequently and rework goals and jobs 
twice a year, in September and June — the beginning of school and 
the end of school — to reflect the situation as it is, to improve it, to 
strengthen it. It renews us, it recommits us to what we believe in, 
what we stand for. 

Organizational Mission Statements 

Mission statements are also vital to successful organizations. 
One of the most important thrusts of my work with organizations 
is to assist them in developing effective mission statements. And to 
be effective, that statement has to come from within the bowels of 
the organization. Everyone should participate in a meaningful 
way — not just the top strategy planners, but everyone. Once 
again, the involvement process is as important as the written 
product and is the key to its use. 

I am always intrigued whenever I go to IBM and watch the 
training process there. Time and time again, I see the leadership of 
the organization come into a group and say that IBM stands for 
three things: the dignity of the individual, excellence, and service. 

These things represent the belief system of IBM. Everything else 
will change, but these three things will not change. Almost like 
osmosis, this belief system has spread throughout the entire 
organization, providing a tremendous base of shared values and 
personal security for everyone who works there. 

Once I was training a group of people for IBM in New York. It 
was a small group, about twenty people, and one of them became 
ill. He called his wife in California, who expressed concern because 
his illness required special treatment. The IBM people responsible 
for the training session arranged to have him taken to an excellent 
hospital with medical speciahsts in the disease. But they could 
sense that his wife was uncertain and really wanted him home 
where their personal physician could handle the problem. 

So they decided to get him home. Concerned about the time 



140 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

involved in driving him to the airport and waiting for a commercial 
plane, they brought in a helicopter, flev^ him to the airport, and 
hired a special plane just to take this man to California. 

I don't know what costs that involved; my guess would be many 
thousands of dollars. But IBM believes in the dignity of the 
individual. That's what the company stands for. To those present, 
that experience represented its belief system and was no surprise. 
I was impressed. 

At another time, I was scheduled to train 175 shopping center 
managers at a particular hotel. I was amazed at the level of service 
there. It wasn't a cosmetic thing. It was evident at all levels, 
spontaneously, without supervision. 

I arrived quite late, checked in, and asked if room service were 
available. The man at the desk said, "No, Mr. Covey, but if you're 
interested, I could go back and get a sandwich or a salad or 
whatever you'd like that we have in the kitchen." His attitude was 
one of total concern about my comfort and welfare. "Would you 
like to see your convention room?" he continued. "Do you have 
everything you need? What can I do for you? I'm here to serve 
you." 

There was no supervisor there checking up. This man was 
sincere. 

The next day I was in the middle of a presentation when I 
discovered that I didn't have all the colored markers 1 needed. So 
I went out into the hall during the brief break and found a bellboy 
running to another convention. "I've got a problem," I said. "I'm 
here training a group of managers and I only have a short break. I 
need some more colored pens." 

He whipped around and almost came to attention. He glanced at 
my name tag and said, "Mr. Covey, I will solve your problem." 

He didn't say, "1 don't know where to go" or "Well, go and 
check at the front desk." He just took care of it. And he made me 
feel like it was his privilege to do so. 

Later, I was in the side lobby, looking at some of the art objects. 
Someone from the hotel came up to me and said, "Mr. Covey, 
would vou like to see a book that describes the art objects in this 
hotel?" How anticipatory! How service-oriented! 

I next observed one of the employees high up on a ladder 
cleaning windows in the lobby. From his vantage point he saw a 
woman having a little difficulty in the garden with a walker. She 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 141 

hadn't really fallen, and she was with other people. But he climbed 
down that ladder, went outside, helped the woman into the lobby 
and saw that she was properly taken care of. Then he went back 
and finished cleaning the windows. 

I wanted to find out how this organization had created a culture 
where people bought so deeply into the value of customer service. 
I interviewed housekeepers, waitresses, bellboys in that hotel and 
found that this attitude had impregnated the minds, hearts, and 
attitudes of every employee there. 

I went through the back door into the kitchen, where I saw the 
central value: "Uncompromising personalized service." I finally 
went to the manager and said, "My business is helping organiza- 
tions develop a powerful team character, a team culture. I am 
amazed at what you have here." 

"Do you want to know the real key?" he inquired. He pulled out 
the mission statement for the hotel chain. 

After reading it, I acknowledged, "That's an impressive state- 
ment. But I know many companies that have impressive mission 
statements." 

"Do you want to see the one for this hotel?" he asked. 

"Do you mean you developed one just for this hotel?" 

"Yes." 

"Different from the one for the hotel chain?" 

"Yes. It's in harmony with that statement, but this one pertains 
to our situation, our environment, our time." He handed me 
another paper. 

"Who developed this mission statement?" I asked. 

"Everybody," he replied. 

"Everybody? Really, everybody?" 

"Yes." 

"Housekeepers?" 

"Yes." 

"Waitresses?" 

"Yes." 

"Desk clerks?" 

"Yes. Do you want to see the mission statement written by the 
people who greeted you last night?" He pulled out a mission 
statement that they, themselves, had written that was interwoven 
with all the other mission statements. Everyone, at every level, 
was involved. 

The mission statement for that hotel was the huD of a great 



142 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

wheel. It spawned the thoughtful, more specialized mission state- 
ments of particular groups of employees. It was used as the 
criterion for every decision that was made. It clarified what those 
people stood for — how they related to the customer, how they 
related to each other. It affected the style of the managers and the 
leaders. It affected the compensation system. It affected the kind of 
people they recruited and how they trained and developed them. 
Every aspect of that organization, essentially, was a function of 
that hub, that mission statement. 

I later visited another hotel in the same chain, and the first thing 
I did when I checked in was to ask to see their mission statement, 
which they promptly gave me. At this hotel, I came to understand 
the motto "Uncompromising personalized service" a little more. 

For a three-day period, I watched every conceivable situation 
where service was called for. I always found that service was 
delivered in a very impressive, excellent way. But it was always 
also very personalized. For instance, in the swimming area I asked 
the attendant where the drinking fountain was. He walked me 
to it. 

But the thing that impressed me the very most was to see an 
employee, on his own, admit a mistake to his boss. We ordered room 
service, and were told when it would be delivered to the room. 
On the way to our room, the room service person spilled the hot 
chocolate, and it took a few extra minutes to go back and change 
the linen on the tray and replace the drink. So the room service 
was about fifteen minutes late, which was really not that important 
to us. 

Nevertheless, the next morning the room service manager 
phoned us to apologize and invited us to have either the buffet 
breakfast or a room service breakfast, compliments of the hotel, to 
in some way compensate for the inconvenience. 

What does it say about the culture of an organization when an 
employee admits his own mistake, unknown to anyone else, to the 
manager so that customer or guest is better taken care of! 

As I told the manager of the first hotel I visited, I know a lot of 
companies with impressive mission statements. But there is a real 
difference, all the difference in the world, in the effectiveness of a 
mission statement created by everyone involved in the organiza- 
tion and one written by a few top executives behind a mahogany 
wall. 



HABIT 2 BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND 143 

One of the fundamental problems in organizations, including 
families, is that people are not committed to the determinations of 
other people for their lives. They simply don't buy into them. 

Many times as I work with organizations, I find people whose 
goals are totally different from the goals of the enterprise. I 
commonly find reward systems completely out of alignment with 
stated value systems. 

When I begin work with companies that have already developed 
some kind of mission statement, I ask them, "How many of the 
people here know that you have a mission statement? How many 
of you know what it contains? How many were involved in 
creating it? How many really buy into it and use it as your frame of 
reference in making decisions?" 

Without involvement, there is no commitment. Mark it down, 
asterisk it, circle it, underline it. No involvement, no commitment. 

Now, in the early stages — when a person is new to an organi- 
zation or when a child in the family is young — you can pretty well 
give them a goal and they'll buy it, particularly if the relationship, 
orientation, and training are good. 

But when people become more mature and their own lives take 
on a separate meaning, they want involvement, significant involve- 
ment. And if they don't have that involvement, they don't buy it. 
Then you have a significant motivational problem which cannot be 
solved at the same level of thinking that created it. 

That's why creating an organizational mission statement takes 
time, patience, involvement, skill, and empathy. Again, it's not a 
quick fix. It takes time and sincerity, correct principles, and the 
courage and integrity to align systems, structure, and management 
style to the shared vision and values. But it's based on correct 
principles and it works. 

An organizational mission statement — one that truly reflects the 
deep shared vision and values of everyone within that 
organization — creates a great unity and tremendous commitment. 
It creates in people's hearts and minds a frame of reference, a set 
of criteria or guidelines, by which they will govern themselves. 
They don't need someone else directing, controlling, criticizing, or 
taking cheap shots. They have bought into the changeless core of 
what the organization is about. 



144 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Application Suggestions 

1. Take the time to record the impressions you had in the funeral 
visualization at the beginning of this chapter. You may w^ant to 
use the chart below to organize your thoughts. 



Area of Activity 


Character 


Contributions 


Achievements 


Family 








Friends 








Work 








Church/Community 
Service, etc. 









2. Take a few moments and write down your roles as you now see 
them. Are you satisfied with that mirror image of your life? 

3. Set up time to completely separate yourself from daily activities 
and to begin work on your personal mission statement. 

4. Go through the chart in Appendix A showing different centers 
and circle all those you can identify with. Do they form a pattern 
for the behavior in your life? Are you comfortable with the 
implications of your analysis? 

5. Start a collection of notes, quotes, and ideas you may want to use 
as resource material in writing your personal mission statement. 

6. Identify a project you will be facing in the near future and apply 
the principle of mental creation. Write down the results you 
desire and what steps will lead to those results. 

7. Share the principles of Habit 2 with your family or work group 
and suggest that together you begin the process of developing a 
family or group mission statement. 



Habit 3 
Put First Things First 

Principles of Personal Management 




Interdependence 




Independence 




Dependence 



> 



145 



146 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



Things which matter most 

must never be at the mercy of things which matter least. 

Goethe 



WILL YOU take just A MOMENT and wHte dovv^n a short answer to the 
following two questions? Your answers will be important to 
you as you begin work on Habit 3. 

Question 1: What one thing could you do (you aren't doing now) 
that if you did on a regular basis, would make a tremendous 
positive difference in your personal life? 

Question 2: What one thing in your business or professional life 
would bring similar results? 

We'll come back to these answers later. But first, let's put Habit 
3 in perspective. 

Habit 3 is the personal fruit, the practical fulfillment of Habits 1 
and 2. 

Habit 1 says, "You're the creator. You are in charge." It's based 
on the four unique human endowments of imagination, conscience, 
independent will, and, particularly, self -awareness. It empowers you 
to say, "That's an unhealthy program I've been given from my 
childhood, from my social mirror. I don't like that ineffective script. 
I can change." 

Habit 2 is the first or mental creation. It's based on imagination — 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 247 

the ability to envision, to see the potential, to create with our 
minds what we cannot at present see with our eyes; and 
conscience — the ability to detect our own uniqueness and the 
personal, moral, and ethical guidelines within which we can most 
happily fulfill it. It's the deep contact with our basic paradigms and 
values and the vision of what we can become. 

Habit 3, then, is the second creation, the physical creation. It's 
the fulfillment, the actualization, the natural emergence of Habits 
1 and 2. It's the exercise of independent will toward becoming 
principle-centered. It's the day-in, day-out, moment-by-moment 
doing it. 

Habits 1 and 2 are absolutely essential and prerequisite to Habit 
3. You can't become principle-centered without first being aware of 
and developing your own proactive nature. You can't become 
principle-centered without first being aware of your paradigms 
and understanding how to shift them and align them with princi- 
ples. You can't become principle-centered without a vision of and 
a focus on the unique contribution that is yours to make. 

But with that foundation, you can become principle-centered, 
day-in and day-out, moment-by-moment, by living Habit 3 — by 
practicing effective self-management. 

Management, remember, is clearly different from leadership. 
Leadership is primarily a high-powered, right brain activity. It's 
more of an art; it's based on a philosophy. You have to ask the 
ultimate questions of life when you're dealing with personal 
leadership issues. 

But once you have dealt with those issues, once you have 
resolved them, you then have to manage yourself effectively to 
create a life congruent with your answers. The ability to manage 
well doesn't make much difference if you're not even in the "right 
jungle." But if you are in the right jungle, it makes all the 
difference. In fact, the ability to manage well determines the 
quality and even the existence of the second creation. Management 
is the breaking down, the analysis, the sequencing, the specific 
application, the time-bound left-brain aspect of effective self- 
government. My own maxim of personal effectiveness is this: 
Manage from the left; lead from the right. 

The Power of Independent Will 

In addition to self-awareness, imagination, and conscience, it is 
the fourth human endowment — independent will — that really makes 



148 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

effective self-management possible. It is the ability to make deci- 
sions and choices and to act in accordance with them. It is the 
ability to act rather than to be acted upon, to proactively carry out 
the program we have developed through the other three endow- 
ments. 

The human will is an amazing thing. Time after time, it has 
triumphed against unbelievable odds. The Helen Kellers of this 
world give dramatic evidence to the value, the power of the 
independent will. 

But as we examine this endowment in the context of effective 
self-management, we realize it's usually not the dramatic, the 
visible, the once-in-a-lifetime, up-by-the-bootstraps effort that 
brings enduring success. Empowerment comes from learning how 
to use this great endowment in the decisions we make every day. 

The degree to which we have developed our independent will in 
our everyday lives is measured by our personal integrity. Integrity 
is, fundamentally, the value we place on ourselves. It's our ability 
to make and keep commitments to ourselves, to "walk our talk." 
It's honor with self, a fundamental part of the Character Ethic, the 
essence of proactive growth. 

Effective management is putting first things first. While leadership 
decides what "first things" are, it is management that puts them 
first, day-by-day, moment-by-moment. Management is discipline, 
carrying it out. 

Discipline derives from disciple — disciple to a philosophy, disci- 
ple to a set of principles, disciple to a set of values, disciple to an 
overriding purpose, to a superordinate goal or a person who 
represents that goal. 

In other words, if you are an effective manager of your self, your 
discipline comes from within; it is a function of your independent 
will. You are a disciple, a follower, of your own deep values and 
their source. And you have the will, the integrity, to subordinate 
your feelings, your impulses, your moods to those values. 

One of my favorite essays is "The Common Denominator of 
Success," written by E. M. Gray. He spent his life searching for the 
one denominator that all successful people share. He found it 
wasn't hard work, good luck, or astute human relations, though 
those were all important. The one factor that seemed to transcend 
all the rest embodies the essence of Habit 3 — putting first things 
first. 

"The successful person has the habit of doing the things failures 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 149 

don't like to do," he observed. "They don't like doing them either 
necessarily. But their disliking is subordinated to the strength of 
their purpose." 

That subordination requires a purpose, a mission, a Habit 2 clear 
sense of direction and value, a burning "yes!" inside that makes it 
possible to say "no" to other things. It also requires independent 
will, the power to do something when you don't want to do it, to 
be a function of your values rather than a function of the impulse 
or desire of any given moment. It's the power to act with integrity 
to your proactive first creation. 

Four Generations of Time Management 

In Habit 3 we are dealing with many of the questions addressed 
in the field of life and time management. As a longtime student of 
this fascinating field, I am personally persuaded that the essence of 
the best thinking in the area of time management can be captured 
in a single phrase: Organize and execute around priorities. That phrase 
represents the evolution of three generations of time management 
theory, and how to best do it is the focus of a wide variety of 
approaches and materials. 

Personal management has evolved in a pattern similar to many 
other areas of human endeavor. Major developmental thrusts, or 
"waves" as Alvin Toffler calls them, follow each other in succes- 
sion, each adding a vital new dimension. For example, in social 
development, the agricultural revolution was followed by the 
industrial revolution, which was followed by the informational 
revolution. Each succeeding wave created a surge of social and 
personal progress. 

Likewise, in the area of time management, each generation 
builds on the one before it — each one moves us toward greater 
control of our lives. The first wave or generation could be charac- 
terized by notes and checklists, an effort to give some semblance of 
recognition and inclusiveness to the many demands placed on our 
time and energy. 

The second generation could be characterized by calendars and 
appointment books. This wave reflects an attempt to look ahead, to 
schedule events and activities in the future. 

The third generation reflects the current time management field. 
It adds to those preceding generations the important idea of 
prioritization, of clarifying values, and of comparing the relative 



250 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

worth of activities based on their relationship to those values. In 
addition, it focuses on setting goals — specific long-, intermediate-, 
and short-term targets toward which time and energy would be 
directed in harmony with values. It also includes the concept of 
daily planning, of making a specific plan to accomplish those goals 
and activities determined to be of greatest worth. 

While the third generation has made a significant contribution, 
people have begun to realize that "efficient" scheduling and 
control of time are often counterproductive. The efficiency focus 
creates expectations that clash with the opportunities to develop 
rich relationships, to meet human needs, and to enjoy spontaneous 
moments on a daily basis. 

As a result, many people have become turned off by time 
management programs and planners that make them feel too 
scheduled, too restricted, and they "throw the baby out with the 
bath water," reverting to first or second generation techniques to 
preserve relationships, spontaneity, and quality of life. 

But there is an emerging fourth generation that is different in 
kind. It recognizes that "time management" is really a misnomer — 
the challenge is not to manage time, but to manage ourselves. 
Satisfaction is a function of expectation as well as realization. And 
expectation (and satisfaction) lie in our Circle of Influence. 

Rather than focusing on things and time, fourth generation 
expectations focus on preserving and enhancing relationships and 
on accomplishing results — in short, on maintaining the P/PC Bal- 
ance. 



Quadrant II 

The essential focus of the fourth generation of management can 
be captured in the time management matrix diagrammed on the 
next page. Basically, we spend time in one of four ways. 

As you can see, the two factors that define an activity are urgent 
and important. Urgent means it requires immediate attention. It's 
"Now!" Urgent things act on us. A ringing phone is urgent. Most 
people can't stand the thought of just allowing the phone to ring. 

You could spend hours preparing materials, you could get all 
dressed up and travel to a person's office to discuss a particular 
issue, but if the phone were to ring while you were there, it would 
generally take precedence over your personal visit. 

If you were to phone someone, there aren't many people who 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 



151 



THE TIME MANAGEMENT MATRIX 



Urgent 



Not Urgent 



- I 



II 





ACTIVITIES: 


ACTIVITIES: 


o 


Crises 


Prevention, PC activities 


b 


Pressing problems 
Deadline-driven projects 


Relationship building 
Recognizing new opportunities 
Planning, recreation 




III 


IV 


"2 


ACTIVITIES: 


ACTIVITIES: 


o 
S 

o 
Z 


Interruptions, some calls 
Some mail, some reports 
Some meetings 
Proximate, pressing matters 


Trivia, busy work 
Some mail 
Some phone calls 
Time wasters 




Popular activities 


Pleasant activities 



would say, 'Til get to you in 15 minutes; just hold." But those 
same people would probably let you wait in an office for at least 
that long while they completed a telephone conversation with 
someone else. 

Urgent matters are usually visible. They press on us; they insist 
on action. They're often popular with others. They're usually right 
in front of us. And often they are pleasant, easy, fun to do. But so 
often they are unimportant! 

Importance, on the other hand, has to do with results. If some- 
thing is important, it contributes to your mission, your values, 
your high priority goals. 

We react to urgent matters. Important matters that are not urgent 
require more initiative, more proactivity. We must act to seize 
opportunity, to make things happen. If we don't practice Habit 2, 
if we don't have a clear idea of what is important, of the results we 
desire in our lives, we are easily diverted into responding to the 
urgent. 

Look for a moment at the four quadrants in the time management 



152 



THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



matrix. Quadrant I is both urgent and important. It deals with 
significant resuUs that require immediate attention. We usually call 
the activities in Quadrant I "crises" or "problems." We all have 
some Quadrant I activities in our lives. But Quadrant I consumes 
many people. They are crisis managers, problem-minded people, 
deadline-driven producers. 

As long as you focus on Quadrant I, it keeps getting bigger and 
bigger until it dominates you. It's like the pounding surf. A huge 
problem comes and knocks you down and you're wiped out. You 
struggle back up only to face another one that knocks you down 
and slams you to the ground. 

Some people are literally beaten up by problems all day every 
day. The only relief they have is in escaping to the not important, 
not urgent activities of Quadrant IV. So when you look at their 
total matrix, 90 percent of their time is in Quadrant I and most of 
the remaining 10 percent is in Quadrant IV, with only negligible 
attention paid to Quadrants II and III. That's how people who 
manage their lives by crisis live. 



I RESULTS: 

• Stress 

• Burnout 

• Crisis management 

• Always putting out fires 



II 



IV 



III 



m 



There are other people who spend a great deal of time 
"urgent, but not important" Quadrant III, thinking they're in 
Quadrant I. They spend most of their time reacting to things that 
are urgent, assuming they are also important. But the reality is that 
the urgency of these matters is often based on the priorities and 
expectations of others. 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 



153 



I 


II 


III RESULTS: 


IV 


• Short-term focus 




• Crisis management 




• Reputation-chameleon character 




• See goals and plans as worthless 




• Feel victimized, out of control 




• Shallow or broken relationships 





People who spend time almost exclusively in Quadrants III and 
IV basically lead irresponsible lives. 



II 



III 



IV 



RESULTS: 



Total irresponsibility 
Fired from jobs 
Dependent on others 
or institutions for basics 



Effective people stay out of Quadrants III and IV because, urgent 
or not, they aren't important. They also shrink Quadrant I down to 
size by spending more time in Quadrant II. 

Quadrant II is the heart of effective personal management. It 
deals with things that are not urgent, but are important. It deals 



154 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



I 


II 


RESULTS: 


iL 


• Vision, perspective 

• Balance 

• Discipline 

• Control 

• Few crises 



with things like building relationships, writing a personal mission 
statement, long-range planning, exercising, preventive mainte- 
nance, preparation — all those things we know we need to do, but 
somehow seldom get around to doing, because they aren't urgent. 

To paraphrase Peter Drucker, effective people are not problem- 
minded; they're opportunity-minded. They feed opportunities and 
starve problems. They think preventively. They have genuine 
Quadrant 1 crises and emergencies that require their immediate 
attention, but the number is comparatively small. They keep P and 
PC in balance by focusing on the important, but not urgent, high 
leverage capacity-building activities of Quadrant II. 

With the time management matrix in mind, take a moment now 
and consider how you answered the questions at the beginning of 
this chapter. What quadrant do they fit in? Are they important? 
Are they urgent? 

My guess is that they probably fit into Quadrant II. They are 
obviously important, deeply important, but not urgent. And 
because they aren't urgent, you don't do them. 

Now look again at the nature of those questions: What one thing 
could you do in your personal and professional life that, if you did 
on a regular basis, would make a tremendous positive difference in your 
life? Quadrant II activities have that kind of impact. Our effective- 
ness takes quantum leaps when we do them. 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 155 

I asked a similar question to a group of shopping center mana- 
gers. "If you were to do one thing in your professional work that 
you know would have enormously positive effects on the results, 
what would it be?" Their unanimous response was to build helpful 
personal relationships with the tenants, the owners of the stores 
inside the shopping center, which is a Quadrant II activity. 

We did an analysis of the time they were spending on that 
activity. It was less than 5 percent. They had good reasons — 
problems, one right after another. They had reports to make out, 
meetings to go to, correspondence to answer, phone calls to make, 
constant interruptions. Quadrant I had consumed them. 

They were spending very little time with the store managers, 
and the time they did spend was filled with negative energy. The 
only reason they visited the store managers at all was to enforce 
the contract — to collect the money or discuss advertising or other 
practices that were out of harmony with center guidelines, or some 
similar thing. 

The store owners were struggling for survival, let alone prosper- 
ity. They had employment problems, cost problems, inventory 
problems, and a host of other problems. Most of them had no 
training in management at all. Some were fairly good merchandis- 
ers, but they needed help. The tenants didn't even want to see the 
shopping center owners; they were just one more problem to 
contend with. 

So the owners decided to be proactive. They determined their 
purpose, their values, their priorities. In harmony with those 
priorities, they decided to spend about one-third of their time in 
helping relationships with the tenants. 

In working with that organization for about a year and a half, I 
saw them climb to around 20 percent, which represented more 
than a fourfold increase. In addition, they changed their role. They 
became listeners, trainers, consultants to the tenants. Their inter- 
changes were filled with positive energy. 

The effect was dramatic, profound. By focusing on relationships 
and results rather than time and methods, the numbers went up, 
the tenants were thrilled with the results created by new ideas and 
skills, and the shopping center managers were more effective and 
satisfied and increased their list of potential tenants and lease 
revenue based on increased sales by the tenant stores. They were 
no longer policemen or hovering supervisors. They were problem 
solvers, helpers. 



156 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

» * * 

Whether you are a student at the university, a w^orker in an 
assembly line, a homemaker, fashion designer, or president of a 
company, I believe that if you were to ask what lies in Quadrant II 
and cultivate the proactivity to go after it, you would find the same 
results. Your effectiveness would increase dramatically. Your crises 
and problems would shrink to manageable proportions because 
you would be thinking ahead, working on the roots, doing the 
preventive things that keep situations from developing into crises 
in the first place. In time management jargon, this is called the 
Pareto Principle — 80 percent of the results flow out of 20 percent of 
the activities. 

What It Takes to Say "No" 

The only place to get time for Quadrant II in the beginning is 
from Quadrants III and IV. You can't ignore the urgent and 
important activities of Quadrant I, although it will shrink in size as 
you spend more time with prevention and preparation in Quadrant 
II. But the initial time for Quadrant II has to come out of III and IV. 

You have to be proactive to work on Quadrant II because 
Quadrants I and III work on you. To say "yes" to important 
Quadrant II priorities, you have to learn to say "no" to other 
activities, sometimes apparently urgent things. 

Some time ago, my wife was invited to serve as chairman of a 
committee in a community endeavor. She had a number of truly 
important things she was trying to work on, and she really didn't 
want to do it. But she felt pressured into it and finally agreed. 

Then she called one of her dear friends to ask if she would serve 
on her committee. Her friend listened for a long time and then 
said, "Sandra, that sounds like a wonderful project, a really 
worthy undertaking. I appreciate so much your inviting me to be a 
part of it. I feel honored by it. For a number of reasons, I won't be 
participating myself, but I want you to know how much I appre- 
ciate your invitation." 

Sandra was ready for anything but a pleasant "no." She turned 
to me and sighed, "I wish I'd said that." 

I don't mean to imply that you shouldn't be involved in 
significant service projects. Those things are important. But you 
have to decide what your highest priorities are and have the 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 157 

courage — pleasantly, smilingly, nonapologetically — to say "no" to 
other things. And the way you do that is by having a bigger "yes" 
burning inside. The enemy of the "best" is often the "good." 

Keep in mind that you are always saying "no" to something. If 
it isn't to the apparent, urgent things in your life, it is probably to 
the more fundamental, highly important things. Even when the 
urgent is good, the good can keep you from your best, keep you 
from your unique contribution, if you let it. 

When I was Director of University Relations at a large university, 
I hired a very talented, proactive, creative writer. One day, after he 
had been on the job for a few months, I went into his office and 
asked him to work on some urgent matters that were pressing 
on me. 

He said, "Stephen, I'll do whatever you want me to do. Just let 
me share with you my situation." 

Then he took me over to his wallboard, where he had listed over 
two dozen projects he was working on, together with performance 
criteria and deadline dates that had been clearly negotiated before. 
He was highly disciplined, which is why I went to see him in the 
first place. "If you want to get something done, give it to a busy 
man." 

Then he said, "Stephen, to do the jobs that you want done right 
would take several days. Which of these projects would you like 
me to delay or cancel to satisfy your request?" 

Well, I didn't want to take the responsibility for that. I didn't 
want to put a cog in the wheel of one of the most productive people 
on the staff just because I happened to be managing by crisis at the 
time. The jobs I wanted done were urgent, but not important. So 
I went and found another crisis manager and gave the job to him. 

We say "yes" or "no" to things daily, usually many times a day. 
A center of correct principles and a focus on our personal mission 
empowers us with wisdom to make those judgments effectively. 

As I work with different groups, 1 tell them that the essence of 
effective time and life management is to organize and execute 
around balanced priorities. Then I ask this question: if you were to 
fault yourself in one of three areas, which would it be: (1) the 
inability to prioritize; (2) the inability or desire to organize around 
those priorities; or (3) the lack of discipline to execute around them, 
to stay with your priorities and organization? 

Most people say their main fault is a lack of discipline. On 



158 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

deeper thought, I believe that is not the case. The basic problem is 
that their priorities have not become deeply planted in their hearts 
and minds. They haven't really internalized Habit 2. 

There are many people who recognize the value of Quadrant II 
activities in their lives, whether they identify them as such or not. 
And they attempt to give priority to those activities and integrate 
them into their lives through self-discipline alone. But without a 
principle center and a personal mission statement, they don't have 
the necessary foundation to sustain their efforts. They're working 
on the leaves, on the attitudes and the behaviors of discipline, 
without even thinking to examine the roots, the basic paradigms 
from which their natural attitudes and behaviors flow. 

A Quadrant II focus is a paradigm that grows out of a principle 
center. If you are centered on your spouse, your money, your 
friends, your pleasure, or any extrinsic factor, you will keep getting 
thrown back into Quadrants I and III, reacting to the outside forces 
your life is centered on. Even if you're centered on yourself, you'll 
end up in I and III reacting to the impulse of the moment. Your 
independent will alone cannot effectively discipline you against 
your center. 

In the words of the architectural maxim, form follows function. 
Likewise, management follows leadership. The way you spend 
your time is a result of the way you see your time and the way you 
really see your priorities. If your priorities grow out of a principle 
center and a personal mission, if they are deeply planted in your 
heart and in your mind, you will see Quadrant II as a natural, 
exciting place to invest your time. 

It's almost impossible to say "no" to the popularity of Quadrant 
III or to the pleasure of escape to Quadrant IV if you don't have a 
bigger "yes" burning inside. Only when you have the self- 
awareness to examine your program — and the imagination and 
conscience to create a new, unique, principle-centered program to 
which you can say "yes" — only then will you have sufficient 
independent will power to say "no," with a genuine smile, to the 
unimportant. 

Moving into Quadrant II 

If Quadrant II activities are clearly the heart of effective personal 
management — the "first things" we need to put first — then how 
do we organize and execute around those things? 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 259 

The first generation of time management does not even recog- 
nize the concept of priority. It gives us notes and "to do" lists that 
we can cross off, and we feel a temporary sense of accomplishment 
every time we check something off, but no priority is attached to 
items on the list. In addition, there is no correlation between 
what's on the list and our ultimate values and purposes in life. We 
simply respond to whatever penetrates our awareness and appar- 
ently needs to be done. 

Many people manage from this first-generation paradigm. It's 
the course of least resistance. There's no pain or strain; it's fun to 
"go with the flow." Externally imposed disciplines and schedules 
give people the feeling that they aren't responsible for results. 

But first-generation managers, by definition, are not effective 
people. They produce very little, and their life-style does nothing 
to build their production capability. Buffeted by outside forces, 
they are often seen as undependable and irresponsible, and they 
have very little sense of control and self-esteem. 

Second-generation managers assume a little more control. They 
plan and schedule in advance and generally are seen as more 
responsible because they "show up" when they're supposed to. 

But again, the activities they schedule have no priority or 
recognized correlation to deeper values and goals. They have few 
significant achievements and tend to be schedule oriented. 

Third-generation managers take a significant step forward. They 
clarify their values and set goals. They plan each day and prioritize 
their activities. 

As I have said, this is where most of the time management field 
is today. But this third generation has some critical limitations. 
First, it limits vision — daily planning often misses important things 
that can only be seen from a larger perspective. The very language 
"daily planning" focuses on the urgent — the "now." While third 
generation prioritization provides order to activity, it doesn't 
question the essential importance of the activity in the first 
place — it doesn't place the activity in the context of principles, 
personal mission, roles, and goals. The third-generation value- 
driven daily planning approach basically prioritizes the Quadrant I 
and III problems and crises of the day. 

In addition, the third generation makes no provision for man- 
aging roles in a balanced way. It lacks realism, creating the 
tendency to over-schedule the day, resulting in frustration and the 
desire to occasionally throw away the plan and escape to Quadrant 



260 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

IV. And its efficiency, time management focus tends to strain 
relationships rather than build them. 

While each of the three generations has recognized the value of 
some kind of management tool, none has produced a tool that 
empowers a person to live a principle-centered, Quadrant II 
life-style. The first-generation notepads and "to do" lists give us no 
more than a place to capture those things that penetrate our 
awareness so we won't forget them. The second-generation ap- 
pointment books and calendars merely provide a place to record 
our future commitments so that we can be where we have agreed 
to be at the appropriate time. 

Even the third generation, with its vast array of planners and 
materials, focuses primarily on helping people prioritize and plan 
their Quadrants I and III activities. Though many trainers and 
consultants recognize the value of Quadrant II activities, the actual 
planning tools of the third generation do not facilitate organizing 
and executing around them. 

As each generation builds on those that have preceded it, the 
strengths and some of the tools of each of the first three generations 
provide elemental material for the fourth. But there is an added 
need for a new dimension, for the paradigm and the implementa- 
tion that will empower us to move into Quadrant II, to become 
principle-centered and to manage ourselves to do what is truly 
most important. 

The Quadrant II Tool 

The objective of Quadrant II management is to manage our lives 
effectively — from a center of sound principles, from a knowledge 
of our personal mission, with a focus on the important as well as 
the urgent, and within the framework of maintaining a balance 
between increasing our production and increasing our production 
capability. 

This is, admittedly, an ambitious objective for people caught in 
the thick of thin things in Quadrants III and IV. But striving to 
achieve it will have a phenomenal impact on personal effectiveness. 

A Quadrant II organizer will need to meet six important criteria. 

Coherence. Coherence suggests that there is harmony, unity, and 
integrity between your vision and mission, your roles and goals, 
your priorities and plans, and your desires and discipline. In your 
planner, there should be a place for your personal mission 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 161 

statement so that you can constantly refer to it. There also needs 
to be a place for your roles and for both short- and long-term 
goals. 

Balance. Your tool should help you to keep balance in your life, to 
identify your various roles and keep them right in front of you, so 
that you don't neglect important areas such as your health, your 
family, professional preparation, or personal development. 

Many people seem to think that success in one area can 
compensate for failure in other areas of life. But can it really? 
Perhaps it can for a limited time in some areas. But can success in 
your profession compensate for a broken marriage, ruined health, 
or weakness in personal character? True effectiveness requires 
balance, and your tool needs to help you create and maintain it. 

Quadrant II Focus. You need a tool that encourages you, motivates 
you, actually helps you spend the time you need in Quadrant II, so 
that you're dealing with prevention rather than prioritizing crises. 
In my opinion, the best way to do this is to organize your life on a 
weekly basis. You can still adapt and prioritize on a daily basis, but 
the fundamental thrust is organizing the week. 

Organizing on a weekly basis provides much greater balance and 
context than daily planning. There seems to be implicit cultural 
recognition of the week as a single, complete unit of time. 
Business, education, and many other facets of society operate 
within the framework of the week, designating certain days for 
focused investment and others for relaxation or inspiration. The 
basic Judeo-Christian ethic honors the Sabbath, the one day out of 
every seven set aside for uplifting purposes. 

Most people think in terms of weeks. But most third-generation 
planning tools focus on daily planning. While they may help you 
prioritize your activities, they basically only help you organize 
crises and busywork. The key is not to prioritize what's on your 
schedule, but to schedule your priorities. And this can best be done in 
the context of the week. 

A "People" Dimension. You also need a tool that deals with people, 
not just schedules. While you can think in terms of efficiency in 
dealing with time, a principle-centered person thinks in terms of 
effectiveness in dealing with people. There are times when principle- 
centered Quadrant II living requires the subordination of schedules 
to people. Your tool needs to reflect that value, to facilitate 



162 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

implementation rather than create guilt when a schedule is not 
followed. 

Flexibility. Your planning tool should be your servant, never your 
master. Since it has to work for you, it should be tailored to your 
style, your needs, your particular ways. 

Portability. Your tool should also be portable, so that you can carry 
it with you most of the time. You may want to review your 
personal mission statement while riding the bus. You may want to 
measure the value of a new opportunity against something you 
already have planned. If your organizer is portable, you will keep 
it with you so that important data is always within reach. 

Since Quadrant II is the heart of effective self-management, you 
need a tool that moves you into Quadrant II. My work with the 
fourth-generation concept has led to the creation of a tool specifi- 
cally designed according to the criteria listed above. But many 
good third-generation tools can easily be adapted. Because the 
principles are sound, the practices or specific applications can vary 
from one individual to the next. 



Becoming a Quadrant II Self-Manager 

Although my effort here is to teach principles, not practices, of 
effectiveness, I believe you can better understand the principles 
and the empowering nature of the fourth generation if you actually 
experience organizing a week from a principle-centered. Quadrant 
II base. 

Quadrant II organizing involves four key activities. 

Identifying Roles. The first task is to write down your key roles. If 
you haven't really given serious thought to the roles in your life, 
you can write down what immediately comes to mind. You have a 
role as an individual. You may want to list one or more roles as a 
family member — a husband or wife, mother or father, son or 
daughter, a member of the extended family of grandparents, 
aunts, uncles, and cousins. You may want to list a few roles in your 
work, indicating different areas in which you wish to invest time 
and energy on a regular basis. You may have roles in church or 
community affairs. 
You don't need to worry about defining the roles in a way that 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 163 

you will live with for the rest of your life — just consider the week 
and write down the areas you see yourself spending time in during 
the next seven days. 

Here are two examples of the way people might see their various 
roles. 

1. Individual 1. Personal Development 

2. Husband/Father 2. Wife 

3. Manager New Products 3. Mother 

4. Manager Research 4. Real Estate Salesperson 

5. Manager Staff Dev. 5. Sunday School Teacher 

6. Manager Administration 6. Symphony Board Member 

7. Chairman United Way 

Selecting Goals. The next step is to think of two or three important 
results you feel you should accomplish in each role during the next 
seven days. These would be recorded as goals. (See next page.) 
At least some of these goals should reflect Quadrant II activities. 
Ideally, these short-term goals would be tied to the longer-term 
goals you have identified in conjunction with your personal 
mission statement. But even if you haven't written your mission 
statement, you can get a feeling, a sense, of what is important as 
you consider each of your roles and two or three of goals for each 
role. 

Scheduling. Now you can look at the week ahead with your goals 
in mind and schedule time to achieve them. For example, if your 
goal is to produce the first draft of your personal mission statement, 
you may want to set aside a two-hour block of time on Sunday to 
work on it. Sunday (or some other day of the week that is special 
to you, your faith, or your circumstances) is often the ideal time to 
plan your more personally uplifting activities, including weekly 
organizing. It's a good time to draw back, to seek inspiration, to 
look at your life in the context of principles and values. 

If you set a goal to become physically fit through exercise, you 
may want to set aside an hour three or four days during the week, 
or possibly every day during the week, to accomplish that goal. 
There are some goals that you may only be able to accomplish 
during business hours, or some that you can only do on Saturday 
when your children are home. Can you begin to see some of the 
advantages of organizing the week instead of the day? 

Having identified roles and set goals, you can translate each goal 



164 



THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



Individual- 
Personal Devel 




Husband / Father 



Manager- 
New Products 



Manager-Research 



Manager-Staff 
Development 



Manager- 
Administration 



United Way 
Chairman 




Rough draft mission 
statement 



Register seminar 



Visit Frank in hospital 




Home mgmt./Karla's 
class 



Tim's science project 
Sarah's bike 




Test market 



parameters 



Interv. ass't. candidates 



Study consumer survey 




Study last test result 
Work on bonding prob. 
Network with Ken and 



Peter 




Performance review 
with Tanie 



Visit with Samuels 




End of month reports 
Salary review report 



Prepare agenda 



PR. visit with Conklin 



Start next vear's plan 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 265 

to a specific day of the week, either as a priority item or, even 
better, as a specific appointment. You can also check your annual 
or monthly calendar for any appointments you may have previ- 
ously made and evaluate their importance in the context of your 
goals, transferring those you decide to keep to your schedule and 
making plans to reschedule or cancel others. 

As you study the following weekly worksheet, observe how 
each of the nineteen most important, often Quadrant 11, goals has 
been scheduled or translated into a specific action plan. In addition, 
notice the box labeled "Sharpen the Saw" that provides a place to 
plan vital renewing Quadrant II activities in each of the four 
human dimensions that will be explained in Habit 7. 

Even with time set aside to accomplish 19 important goals during 
the week, look at the amount of remaining unscheduled space on 
the worksheet! As well as empowering you to put first things first. 
Quadrant II weekly organizing gives you the freedom and the 
flexibility to handle unanticipated events, to shift appointments if 
you need to, to savor relationships and interactions with others, to 
deeply enjoy spontaneous experiences, knowing that you have 
proactively organized your week to accomplish key goals in every 
area of your life. 

Daily Adapting. With Quadrant II weekly organizing, daily plan- 
ning becomes more a function of daily adapting, of prioritizing 
activities and responding to unanticipated events, relationships, 
and experiences in a meaningful way. 

Taking a few minutes each morning to review your schedule can 
put you in touch with the value-based decisions you made as you 
organized the week as well as unanticipated factors that may have 
come up. As you overview the day, you can see that your roles and 
goals provide a natural prioritization that grows out of your innate 
sense of balance. It is a softer, more right-brain prioritization that 
ultimately comes out of your sense of personal mission. 

You may still find that the third-generation A, B, C or 1, 2, 3 
prioritization gives needed order to daily activities. It would be a 
false dichotomy to say that activities are either important or they 
aren't. They are obviously on a continuum, and some important 
activities are more important than others. In the context of weekly 
organizing, third-generation prioritization gives order to daily 
focus. 

But trying to prioritize activities before you even know how they 



166 



THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



The WEEKLY WORKSHEET^m 



Week 
of: 



Sunday Monday 



Roles 



Goals 



Weekly 
Priorities 



Toda/s Priorities 



Individual- 
Personal DeveL 



Husband/ 
Father 



Manager- 
New Products . 



Manager- 
Research 



Manager- 
Staff Devel. 



Manager- 
Adn\inistration> 



United Way 
Chairman 



Rough draft mission 
statement QJ 
Register seminarX2y 
Visit Frank in hospital ^ \ 



Homemgmt./Karla's 



class C4^ 



Tim's science project (5, 



Sarah's bike (5^ 



Test market 
parameters (TJ 



Interv. ass't candidates ( 



Study consumer survey/ 



Study last test result ^ 



Work on bonding prob. Q 
Netw ork with Ken and 
Peter 



I 



a: 



Performance review 



with Janie QS) _ 

Visit with Samuels 04) 



End of month reports Q j 
Salary review report / f> 



Prepare agenda (l^ 
P.R. visit with Conklin 
Start next year's plani O 



A 



SHARPEN THE SAW 



Physical. 
Mental — 
Spiritual. 



Scxrial/Emotional . 



Qo) Salary Review 



Report 



Appointments/Commitments 



(^ 



ivate Time 



Mission State- 



1 ment 



n 



12 



Evening 



10 



11® 



Assistant Job 



12 



Interviews 



/^ Frank-Hospital 



^ © Sarah's Bike 



Evening 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 267 



Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday 


Today's Priorities 


QSond in seminar 


©Ken 




Q^ Visit Samuels 




registration 


Peter 


























































Appointments/Commitments 


8 


8 


A 


8 


8^^ Home mgmt. 
vi^Karla's class 


9 


9 
Q Test market 


^ ® Bonding 


Q 

(to) ^^^* results 


9 


10 


^^ parameters 


'^ problem 


^0 study 


10 


11 


n 


1 


n 


11 


12 
1^ 


12 


12 


12 
/Ov Conklin 


12 


1^ 
Study consumer 


1 


1 


1 


1 


2 

^ survey 


2 


2 


2 


2 


3 


3 


3© 

Performance 


^ @ EOM report 


3 


4 


4 


4 

review-Janie 


4 


4 


5 


5 


5 


5 


5 


/^ Tim's project 


6 


^^ United Way 


6 


6 


7 


7 


agenda 


7 


7 


8 


8 


^Nextyrs. plans 


8 


8 


Evening 


Evening 


Evening 


Evening 


Evening 

7: 00 Theater- 
Browns 



168 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



















Mission 
Statement 


- 


Roles 


- 


Goals 



















LONG-TERM ORGANIZING 



















Roles 


- 


Goals 


- 


Plans 


^^ Schedule 
Delegate 

















WEEKLY ORGANIZING 



relate to your sense of personal mission and how they fit into the 
balance of your life is not effective. You may be prioritizing and 
accomplishing things you don't want or need to be doing at all. 

Can you begin to see the difference between organizing your 
week as a principle-centered. Quadrant II manager and planning 
your days as an individual centered on something else? Can you 
begin to sense the tremendous difference the Quadrant II focus 
would make in your current level of effectiveness? 

Having experienced the power of principle-centered Quadrant II 
organizing in my own life and having seen it transform the lives of 
hundreds of other people, I am persuaded it makes a difference — a 
quantum positive difference. And the more completely weekly 
goals are tied into a wider framework of correct principles and into 
a personal mission statement, the greater the increase in effective- 
ness will be. 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 169 



Living It 



Returning once more to the computer metaphor, if Habit 1 says 
"You're the programmer" "and Habit 2 says "Write the program," 
then Habit 3 says "Run the program," "Live the program." And 
living it is primarily a function of our independent will, our 
self-discipline, our integrity, and commitment — not to short-term 
goals and schedules or to the impulse of the moment, but to the 
correct principles and our own deepest values, which give meaning 
and context to our goals, our schedules, and our lives. 

As you go through your week, there will undoubtedly be times 
when your integrity will be placed on the line. The popularity of 
reacting to the urgent but unimportant priorities of other people in 
Quadrant III or the pleasure of escaping to Quadrant IV will 
threaten to overpower the important Quadrant II activities you 
have planned. Your principle center, your self-awareness, and 
your conscience can provide a high degree of intrinsic security, 
guidance, and wisdom to empower you to use your independent 
will and maintain integrity to the truly important. 

But because you aren't omniscient, you can't always know in 
advance what is truly important. As carefully as you organize the 
week, there will be times when, as a principle-centered person, 
you will need to subordinate your schedule to a higher value. 
Because you are principle-centered, you can do that with an inner 
sense of peace. 

At one point, one of my sons was deeply into scheduling and 
efficiency. One day he had a very tight schedule, which included 
down-to-the-minute time allocations for every activity, including 
picking up some books, washing his car, and "dropping" Carol, 
his girlfriend, among other things. 

Everything went according to schedule until it came to Carol. 
They had been dating for a long period of time, and he had finally 
come to the conclusion that a continued relationship would not 
work out. So, congruent with his efficiency model, he had sched- 
uled a ten- to fifteen-minute telephone call to tell her. 

But the news was very traumatic to her. One-and-a-half hours 
later, he was still deeply involved in a very intense conversation 
with her. Even then, the one visit was not enough. The situation 
was a very frustrating experience for them both. 

Again, you simply can't think efficiency with people. You think 



270 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

effectiveness with people and efficiency with things. I've tried to be 
"efficient" with a disagreeing or disagreeable person and it simply 
doesn't work. I've tried to give ten minutes of "quality time" to a 
child or an employee to solve a problem, only to discover such 
"efficiency" creates new problems and seldom resolves the deepest 
concern. 

I see many parents, particularly mothers with small children, 
often frustrated in their desire to accomplish a lot because all they 
seem to do is meet the needs of little children all day. Remember, 
frustration is a function of our expectations, and our expectations 
are often a reflection of the social mirror rather than our own 
values and priorities. 

But if you have Habit 2 deep inside your heart and mind, you 
have those higher values driving you. You can subordinate your 
schedule to those values with integrity. You can adapt; you can be 
flexible. You don't feel guilty when you don't meet your schedule 
or when you have to change it. 

Advances of the Fourth Generation 

One of the reasons why people resist using third-generation 
time management tools is because they lose spontaneity; they 
become rigid and inflexible. They subordinate people to schedules 
because the efficiency paradigm of the third generation of manage- 
ment is out of harmony with the principle that people are more 
important than things. 

The fourth-generation tool recognizes that principle. It also 
recognizes that the first person you need to consider in terms of 
effectiveness rather than efficiency is yourself. It encourages you to 
spend time in Quadrant II, to understand and center your life on 
principles, to give clear expression to the purposes and values you 
want to direct your daily decisions. It helps you to create balance in 
your life. It helps you rise above the limitations of daily planning 
and organize and schedule in the context of the week. And when 
a higher value conflicts with what you have planned, it empowers 
you to use your self-awareness and your conscience to maintain 
integrity to the principles and purposes you have determined are 
most important. Instead of using a road map, you're using a 
compass. 

The fourth generation of self-management is more advanced 
than the third in five important ways. 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 2 71 

First, it's principle-centered. More than giving lip service to Quad- 
rant II, it creates the central paradigm that empowers you to see 
your time in the context of what is really important and effective. 

Second, it's conscience-directed. It gives you the opportunity to 
organize your life to the best of your ability in harmony with your 
deepest values. But it also gives you the freedom to peacefully 
subordinate your schedule to higher values. 

Third, it defines your unique mission, including values and long-term 
goals. This gives direction and purpose to the way you spend each 
day. 

Fourth, it helps you balance your life by identifying roles, and by 
setting goals and scheduling activities in each key role every week. 

And fifth, it gives greater context through weekly organizing (with 
daily adaptation as needed), rising above the limiting perspective 
of a single day and putting you in touch with your deepest values 
through review of your key roles. 

The practical thread running through all five of these advances is 
a primary focus on relationships and results and a secondary focus 
on time. 

Delegation: Increasing P and PC 

We accomplish all that we do through delegation — either to time 
or to other people. If we delegate to time, we think efficiency. If we 
delegate to other people, we think effectiveness. 

Many people refuse to delegate to other people because they feel 
it takes too much time and effort and they could do the job better 
themselves. But effectively delegating to others is perhaps the 
single most powerful high-leverage activity there is. 

Transferring responsibility to other skilled and trained people 
enables you to give your energies to other high-leverage activities. 
Delegation means growth, both for individuals and for organiza- 
tions. The late J. C. Penney was quoted as saying that the wisest 
decision he ever made was to "let go" after realizing that he 
couldn't do it all by himself any longer. That decision, made long 
ago, enabled the development and growth of hundreds of stores 
and thousands of people. 

Because delegation involves other people, it is a Public Victory 
and could well be included in Habit 4. But because we are focusing 
here on principles of personal management, and the ability to 
delegate to others is the main difference between the role of 



172 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

manager and independent producer, I am approaching delegation 
from the standpoint of your personal managerial skills. 

A producer does whatever is necessary to accomplish desired 
results, to get the golden eggs. A parent who washes the dishes, 
an architect who draws up blueprints, or a secretary who types 
correspondence is a producer. 

But when a person sets up and works with and through people 
and systems to produce golden eggs, that person becomes a 
manager in the interdependent sense. A parent who delegates 
washing the dishes to a child is a manager. An architect who heads 
a team of other architects is a manager. A secretary who supervises 
other secretaries and office personnel is an office manager. 

A producer can invest one hour of effort and produce one unit of 
results, assuming no loss of efficiency. 




A manager, on the other hand, can invest one hour of effort and 
produce ten or fifty or a hundred units through effective delega- 
tion. 




Management is essentially moving the fulcrum over, and the key 
to effective management is delegation. 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 2 7?> 

Gofer Delegation 

There are basically two kinds of delegation: "gofer delegation" 
and "stewardship delegation." Gofer delegation means "Go for 
this, go for that, do this, do that, and tell me when it's done." Most 
people who are producers have a gofer delegation paradigm. 
Remember the machete wielders in the jungle? They are the 
producers. They roll up their sleeves and get the job done. If they 
are given a position of supervision or management, they still think 
like producers. They don't know how to set up a full delegation so 
that another person is committed to achieve results. Because they 
are focused on methods, they become responsible for the results. 

I was involved in a gofer delegation once when our family went 
water skiing. My son, who is an excellent skier, was in the water 
being pulled and I was driving the boat. I handed the camera to 
Sandra and asked her to take some pictures. 

At first, I told her to be selective in her picture taking because we 
didn't have much film left. Then I realized she was unfamiliar with 
the camera, so I became a little more specific. I told her to be sure 
to wait until the sun was ahead of the boat and until our son was 
jumping the wake or making a turn and touching his elbow. 

But the more I thought about our limited footage and her 
inexperience with the camera, the more concerned I became. I 
finally said, "Look, Sandra, just push the button when I tell you. 
Okay?" And I spent the next few minutes yelhng, "Take it! — Take 
it! — Don't take it! — Don't take it!" I was afraid that if I didn't direct 
her every move every second, it wouldn't be done right. 

That was true gofer delegation, one-on-one supervision of 
methods. Many people consistently delegate that way. But how 
much does it really accomplish? And how many people is it 
possible to supervise or manage when you have to be involved in 
every move they make? 

There's a much better way, a more effective way to delegate to 
other people. And it's based on a paradigm of appreciation of the 
self-awareness, the imagination, the conscience, and the free will 
of other people. 

Stewardship Delegation 

Stewardship delegation is focused on results instead of methods. 
It gives people a choice of method and makes them responsible for 



174 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

results. It takes more time in the beginning, but it's time well 
invested. You can move the fulcrum over, you can increase your 
leverage, through stewardship delegation. 

Stewardship delegation involves clear, up-front mutual under- 
standing and commitment regarding expectations in five areas. 

Desired Results. Create a clear, mutual understanding of what 
needs to be accomplished, focusing on what, not how; results, not 
methods. Spend time. Be patient. Visualize the desired result. 
Have the person see it, describe it, make out a quality statement 
of what the results will look like, and by when they will be 
accomplished. 

Guidelines. Identify the parameters within which the individual 
should operate. These should be as few as possible to avoid 
methods delegation, but should include any formidable restric- 
tions. You wouldn't want a person to think he had considerable 
latitude as long as he accomplished the objectives, only to violate 
some long-standing traditional practice or value. That kills initiative 
and sends people back to the gofer's creed: "Just tell me what you 
want me to do, and I'll do it." 

If you know the failure paths of the job, identify them. Be honest 
and open — tell a person where the quicksand is and where the 
wild animals are. You don't want to have to reinvent the wheel 
every day. Let people learn from your mistakes or the mistakes of 
others. Point out the potential failure paths, what not to do, but 
don't tell them what to do. Keep the responsibility for results with 
them — to do whatever is necessary within the guidelines. 

Resources. Identify the human, financial, technical, or organiza- 
tional resources the person can draw on to accomplish the desired 
results. 

Accountability. Set up the standards of performance that will be 
used in evaluating the results and the specific times when reporting 
and evaluation will take place. 

Consequences. Specify what will happen, both good and bad, as a 
result of the evaluation. This could include such things as financial 
rewards, psychic rewards, different job assignments, and natural 
consequences tied into the overall mission of an organization. 

Some years ago, I had an interesting experience in delegation 
with one of my sons. We were having a family meeting, and we 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 1 75 

had our mission statement up on the wall to make sure our plans 
were in harmony with our values. Everybody was there. 

I set up a big blackboard and we wrote down our goals — the key 
things we wanted to do — and the jobs that flowed out of those 
goals. Then I asked for volunteers to do the job. 

"Who wants to pay the mortgage?" I asked. I noticed I was the 
only one with my hand up. 

"Who wants to pay for the insurance? The food? The cars?" I 
seemed to have a real monopoly on the opportunities. 

"Who wants to feed the new baby?" There was more interest 
here, but my wife was the only one with the right qualifications for 
the job. 

As we went down the list, job by job, it was soon evident that 
Mom and Dad had more than sixty-hour work weeks. With that 
paradigm in mind, some of the other jobs took on a more proper 
perspective. 

My seven-year-old son, Stephen, volunteered to take care of the 
yard. Before I actually gave him the job, I began a thorough 
training process. I wanted him to have a clear picture in his mind 
of what a well cared for yard was like, so I took him next door to 
our neighbor's. 

"Look, son," I said. "See how our neighbor's yard is green and 
clean? That's what we're after: green and clean. Now come look at 
our yard. See the mixed colors? That's not it; that's not green. 
Green and clean is what we want. Now how you get it green is up 
to you. You're free to do it any way you want, except paint it. But 
I'll tell you how I'd do it if it were up to me." 

"How would you do it. Dad?" 

"I'd turn on the sprinklers. But you may want to use buckets or 
a hose. It makes no difference to me. All we care about is that the 
color is green. Okay?" 

"Okay." 

"Now let's talk about 'clean,' Son. Clean means no messes 
around — no paper, strings, bones, sticks, or anything that messes 
up the place. I'll tell you what let's do. Let's just clean up half the 
yard right now and look at the difference." 

So we got out two paper sacks and picked up one side of the 
yard. "Now look at this side. Look at the other side. See the 
difference? That's called clean." 

"Wait!" he called. "I see some paper behind that bush!" 

"Oh, good! I didn't notice that newspaper back there. You have 
good eyes. Son. 



176 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

"Now before you decide whether or not you're going to take the 
job, let me tell you a few more things. Because when you take the 
job, I don't do it anymore. It's your job. It's called a stewardship. 
Stewardship means 'a job with a trust.' I trust you to do the job, to 
get it done. Now who's going to be your boss?" 

"You, Dad?" 

"No, not me. You're the boss. You boss yourself. How do you 
like Mom and Dad nagging you all the time?" 

"I don't." 

"We don't like doing it either. It sometimes causes a bad feeling, 
doesn't it? So you boss yourself. Now, guess who your helper is." 

"Who?" 

"I am," I said. "You boss me." 

"I do?" 

"That's right. But my time to help is limited. Sometimes I'm 
away. But when I'm here, you tell me how I can help. I'll do 
anything you want me to do." 

"Okay!" 

"Now guess who judges you." 

"Who?" 

"You judge yourself." 

"I do?" 

"That's right. Twice a week the two of us will walk around the 
yard, and you can show me how it's coming. How are you going 
to judge?" 

"Green and clean." 

"Right!" 

I trained him with those two words for two weeks before I felt he 
was ready to take the job. Finally, the big day came. 

"Is it a deal. Son?" 

"It's a deal." 

"What's the job?" 

"Green and clean." 

"What's green?" 

He looked at our yard, which was beginning to look better. Then 
he pointed next door. "That's the color of his yard." 

"What's clean?" 

"No messes." 

"Who's the boss?" 

"I am." 

"Who's your helper?" 

"You are, when you have time." 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 1 77 

"Who's the judge?" 

"I am. We'll walk around two times a week and I can show you 
how it's coming." 

"And what will we look for?" 

"Green and clean." 

At that time I didn't mention an allowance. But I wouldn't 
hesitate to attach an allowance to such a stewardship. 

Two weeks and two words. I thought he was ready. 

It was Saturday. And he did nothing. Sunday . . . nothing. 
Monday . . . nothing. As I pulled out of the driveway on my way 
to work on Tuesday, I looked at the yellow, cluttered yard and the 
hot July sun on its way up. "Surely he'll do it today," I thought. I 
could rationalize Saturday because that was the day we made the 
agreement. I could rationalize Sunday; Sunday was for other 
things. But I couldn't rationalize Monday. And now it was Tues- 
day. Certainly he'd do it today. It was summertime. What else did 
he have to do? 

AH day I could hardly wait to return home to see what happened. 
As I rounded the corner, I was met with the same picture I left that 
morning. And there was my son at the park across the street 
playing. 

This was not acceptable. I was upset and disillusioned by his 
performance after two weeks of training and all those commit- 
ments. We had a lot of effort, pride, and money invested in the 
yard and I could see it going down the drain. Besides, my 
neighbor's yard was manicured and beautiful, and the situation 
was beginning to get embarrassing. 

I was ready to go back to gofer delegation. Son, you get over here 
and pick up this garbage right now or else! I knew I could get the 
golden egg that way. But what about the goose? What would 
happen to his internal commitment? 

So I faked a smile and yelled across the street, "Hi, Son. How's 
it going?" 

"Fine!" he returned. 

"How's the yard coming?" I knew the minute I said it I had 
broken our agreement. That's not the way we had set up an 
accounting. That's not what we had agreed. 

So he felt justified in breaking it, too. "Fine, Dad." 

I bit my tongue and waited until after dinner. Then I said, "Son, 
let's do as we agreed. Let's walk around the yard together and you 
can show me how it's going in your stewardship." 

As we started out the door, his chin began to quiver. Tears 



178 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

w^elled up in his eyes and, by the time we got out to the middle of 
the yard, he was whimpering. 

"It's so hard. Dad!" 

What's so hard? I thought to myself. You haven't done a single thing! 
But I knew what was hard — self-management, self-supervision. So 
I said, "Is there anything I can do to help?" 

"Would you. Dad?" he sniffed. 

"What was our agreement?" 

"You said you'd help me if you had time." 

"I have time." 

So he ran into the house and came back with two sacks. He 
handed me one. "Will you pick that stuff up?" He pointed to the 
garbage from Saturday night's barbecue. "It makes me sick!" 

So I did. I did exactly what he asked me to do. And that was 
when he signed the agreement in his heart. It became his yard, his 
stewardship. 

He only asked for help two or three more times that entire 
summer. He took care of that yard. He kept it greener and cleaner 
than it had ever been under my stewardship. He even reprimanded 
his brothers and sisters if they left so much as a gum wrapper on 
the lawn. 

Trust is the highest form of human motivation. It brings out the 
very best in people. But it takes time and patience, and it doesn't 
preclude the necessity to train and develop people so that their 
competency can rise to the level of that trust. 

I am convinced that if stewardship delegation is done correctly, 
both parties will benefit and ultimately much more work will get 
done in much less time. I believe that a family that is well 
organized, whose time has been spent effectively delegating on a 
one-on-one basis, can organize the work so that everyone can do 
everything in about an hour a day. But that takes the internal 
capacity to want to manage, not just to produce. The focus is on 
effectiveness, not efficiency. 

Certainly you can pick up that room better than a child, but the 
key is that you want to empower the child to do it. It takes time. 
You have to get involved in the training and development. It takes 
time, but how valuable that time is downstream! It saves you so 
much in the long run. 

This approach involves an entirely new paradigm of delegation. 
In effect, it changes the nature of the relationship: The steward 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 1 79 

becomes his own boss, governed by a conscience that contains the 
commitment to agreed upon desired results. But it also releases his 
creative energies toward doing whatever is necessary in harmony 
with correct principles to achieve those desired results. 

The principles involved in stewardship delegation are correct 
and applicable to any kind of person or situation. With immature 
people, you specify fewer desired results and more guidelines, 
identify more resources, conduct more frequent accountability 
interviews, and apply more immediate consequences. With more 
mature people, you have more challenging desired results, fewer 
guidehnes, less frequent accountability, and less measurable but 
more discernable criteria. 

Effective delegation is perhaps the best indicator of effective 
management simply because it is so basic to both personal and 
organizational growth. 

The Quadrant II Paradigm 

The key to effective management of self, or of others through 
delegation, is not in any technique or tool or extrinsic factor. It is 
intrinsic — in the Quadrant II paradigm that empowers you to see 
through the lens of importance rather than urgency. 

I have included in the Appendix an exercise called "A Quadrant 
II Day at the Office" which will enable you to see in a busi- 
ness setting how powerfully this paradigm can impact your 
effectiveness.* 

As you work to develop a Quadrant II paradigm, you will 
increase your ability to organize and execute every week of your 
life around your deepest priorities, to walk your talk. You will not 
be dependent on any other person or thing for the effective 
management of your life. 

Interestingly, every one of the Seven Habits is in Quadrant II. 
Every one deals with fundamentally important things that, if done 
on a regular basis, would make a tremendous positive difference in 
our lives. 

Application Suggestions: 

1. Identify a Quadrant II activity you know has been neglected in 
your life — one that, if done well, would have a significant impact 



Please refer to Appendix B. 



180 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

in your life, either personally or professionally. Write it down 
and commit to implement it. 

2. Draw^ a time management matrix and try to estimate v^hat 
percentage of your time you spend in each quadrant. Then log 
your time for three days in fifteen-minute intervals. Hou^ accurate 
was your estimate? Are you satisfied with the way you spend 
your time? What do you need to change? 

3. Make a list of responsibilities you could delegate and the people 
you could delegate to or train to be responsible in these areas. 
Determine what is needed to start the process of delegation or 
training. 

4. Organize your next week.* Start by writing down your roles and 
goals for the week, then transfer the goals to a specific action 
plan. At the end of the week, evaluate how well your plan 
translated your deep values and purposes into your daily life and 
the degree of integrity you were able to maintain to those values 
and purposes. 

5. Commit yourself to start organizing on a weekly basis and set up 
a regular time to do it. 

6. Either convert your current planning tool into a fourth generation 
tool or secure such a tool. 

7. Go through "A Quadrant II Day at the Office" (Appendix B) for 
a more in-depth understanding of the impact of a Quadrant II 
paradigm. 



* On the following page is a sample Weekly Worksheet from the Seven Habits Organizer. If 
you would like to try using these worksheets (which you can adapt to your current 
system), please call 1-800-255-0777 for a free four-week supply. 



HABIT 3 PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST 



181 



The WEEKLY WORKSHEEHm 



Roles 



Goals 



Week 
of: 



Weekly 
Priorities 



Sunday Monday 



Today's Priorities 



SHARPEN THE SAW 



Physical _ 
Mental — 
Spiritual . 



Social/Emotional- 



Appointments/Commitments 



10 



n 



12 



Evening 



10 



11 



12 



Evening 



182 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



Tuesday 


Wednesday Thursday Friday 


Saturday 




1 


^oday^s Priorities 
















































































Appointments/Coimtutments 




8 


8 


8 


8 


8 


9 


9 


9 


9 


9 


10 


10 


10 


10 


10 


11 


11 


11 


11 


11 


12 


12 


12 


12 


12 


1 


1 


1 


1 


1 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


4 


4 


4 


4 


4 


5 


5 


5 


5 


5 


6 


6 


6 


6 


6 


7 


7 


7 


7 


7 


8 


8 


8 


8 


8 


Evening 


Evening 


Evening 


Evening 


Evening 



Part Three 



Public 

VICTORY 




Dependence 



Paradigms of 
Interdependence 



There can be no friendship without confidence, 
and no confidence without integrity. 

Samuel Johnson 



BEFORE MOVING INTO THE AREA OF PuBLic VicTORY, we should remember 
that effective interdependence can only be built on a founda- 
tion of true independence. Private Victory precedes Public Victory. 
Algebra comes before calculus. 

As we look back and survey the terrain to determine where 
we've been and where we are in relationship to where we're going, 
we clearly see that we could not have gotten where we are without 
coming the way we came. There aren't any other roads; there 
aren't any shortcuts. There's no way to parachute into this terrain. 
The landscape ahead is covered with the fragments of broken 
relationships of people who have tried. They've tried to jump into 
effective relationships without the maturity, the strength of char- 
acter, to maintain them. 

But you just can't do it; you simply have to travel the road. You 
can't be successful with other people if you haven't paid the price 
of success with yourself. 

A few years ago when I was giving a seminar on the Oregon 
coast, a man came up to me and said, "You know, Stephen, I really 
don't enjoy coming to these seminars." He had my attention. 

"Look at everyone else here," he continued. "Look at this 
beautiful coastline and the sea out there and all that's happening. 
And all I can do is sit and worry about the grilling I'm going to get 
from my wife tonight on the phone. 

"She gives me the third degree every time I'm away. Where did 

185 



186 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

I eat breakfast? Who else was there? Was I in meetings all morning? 
When did we stop for lunch? What did I do during lunch? How did 
I spend the afternoon? What did I do for entertainment in the 
evening? Who was with me? What did we talk about? 

"And what she really wants to know, but never quite asks, is 
who she can call to verify everything I tell her. She just nags me 
and questions everything I do whenever I'm away. It's taken the 
bloom out of this whole experience. I really don't enjoy it at all." 

He did look pretty miserable. We talked for a while, and then he 
made a very interesting comment. "I guess she knows all the 
questions to ask," he said a little sheepishly. "It was at a semi- 
nar like this that I met her . . . when I was married to someone 
else!" 

I considered the implications of his comment and then said, 
"You're kind of into 'quick fix,' aren't you?" 

"What do you mean?" he replied. 

"Well, you'd like to take a screwdriver and just open up your 
wife's head and rewire that attitude of hers really fast, wouldn't 
you?" 

"Sure, I'd like her to change," he exclaimed. "I don't think it's 
right for her to constantly grill me like she does." 

"My friend," I said, "you can't talk your way out of problems 
you behave yourself into." 

We're dealing with a very dramatic and very fundamental 
paradigm shift here. You may try to lubricate your social interac- 
tions with personality techniques and skills, but in the process, 
you may truncate the vital character base. You can't have the fruits 
without the roots. It's the principle of sequencing: Private Victory 
precedes Public Victory. Self-mastery and self-discipline are the 
foundation of good relationships with others. 

Some people say that you have to like yourself before you can 
like others. I think that idea has merit, but if you don't know 
yourself, if you don't control yourself, if you don't have mastery 
over yourself, it's very hard to like yourself, except in some 
short-term, psych-up, superficial way. 

Real self-respect comes from dominion over self, from true 
independence. And that's the focus of Habits 1, 2, and 3. Inde- 
pendence is an achievement. Interdependence is a choice only 
independent people can make. Unless we are willing to achieve 
real independence, it's foolish to try to develop human relations 



PARADIGMS OF INTERDEPENDENCE 187 

skills. We might try. We might even have some degree of success 
when the sun is shining. But when the difficult times come — and 
they will — we won't have the foundation to keep things together. 

The most important ingredient we put into any relationship is 
not what we say or what we do, but what we are. And if our words 
and our actions come from superficial human relations techniques 
(the Personality Ethic) rather than from our own inner core (the 
Character Ethic), others will sense that duplicity. We simply won't 
be able to create and sustain the foundation necessary for effective 
interdependence. 

The techniques and skills that really make a difference in human 
interaction are the ones that almost naturally flow from a truly 
independent character. So the place to begin building any relation- 
ship is inside ourselves, inside our Circle of Influence, our own 
character. As we become independent — proactive, centered in 
correct principles, value driven and able to organize and execute 
around the priorities in our life with integrity — we then can choose 
to become interdependent — capable of building rich, enduring, 
highly productive relationships with other people. 

As we look at the terrain ahead, we see that we're entering a 
whole new dimension. Interdependence opens up worlds of 
possibilities for deep, rich, meaningful associations, for geometri- 
cally increased productivity, for serving, for contributing, for 
learning, for growing. But it is also where we feel the greatest pain, 
the greatest frustration, the greatest roadblocks to happiness and 
success. And we're very aware of that pain because it is acute. 

We can often live for years with the chronic pain of our lack of 
vision, leadership or management in our personal lives. We feel 
vaguely uneasy and uncomfortable and occasionally take steps to 
ease the pain, at least for a time. Because the pain is chronic, we get 
used to it, we learn to live with it. 

But when we have problems in our interactions with other 
people, we're very aware of acute pain — it's often intense, and we 
want it to go away. 

That's when we try to treat the symptoms with quick fixes and 
techniques — the band-aids of the Personality Ethic. We don't 
understand that the acute pain is an outgrowth of the deeper, 
chronic problem. And until we stop treating the symptoms and 
start treating the problem, our efforts will only bring counterpro- 
ductive results. We will only be successful at obscuring the chronic 
pain even more. 



188 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Now, as we think of effective interaction with others, let's go 
back to our earlier definition of effectiveness. We've said it's the 
P/PC balance, the fundamental concept in the story of the goose 
and the golden egg. 

In an interdependent situation, the golden eggs are the effec- 
tiveness, the wonderful synergy, the results created by open 
communication and positive interaction with others. And to get 
those eggs on a regular basis, we need to take care of the goose. We 
need to create and care for the relationships that make those results 
realities. 

So before we descend from our point of reconnaissance and get 
into Habits 4, 5, and 6, I would like to introduce what I believe to 
be a very powerful metaphor in describing relationships and in 
defining the P/PC balance in an interdependent reality. 

The Emotional Bank Account 

We all know what a financial bank account is. We make deposits 
into it and build up a reserve from which we can make withdrawals 
when we need to. An Emotional Bank Account is a metaphor that 
describes the amount of trust that's been built up in a relationship. 
It's the feeling of safeness you have with another human being. 

If I make deposits into an Emotional Bank Account with you 
through courtesy, kindness, honesty, and keeping my commit- 
ments to you, I build up a reserve. Your trust toward me becomes 
higher, and I can call upon that trust many times if I need to. I can 
even make mistakes and that trust level, that emotional reserve, 
will compensate for it. My communication may not be clear, but 
you'll get my meaning anyway. You won't make me "an offender 
for a word." When the trust account is high, communication is 
easy, instant, and effective. 

But if I have a habit of showing discourtesy, disrespect, cutting 
you off, overreacting, ignoring you, becoming arbitrary, betraying 
your trust, threatening you, or playing little tin god in your life, 
eventually my Emotional Bank Account is overdrawn. The trust 
level gets very low. Then what flexibility do I have? 

None. I'm walking on mine fields. I have to be very careful of 
everything I say. I measure every word. It's tension city, memo 
haven. It's protecting my backside, politicking. And many organi- 
zations are filled with it. Many families are filled with it. Many 
marriages are filled with it. 

If a large reserve of trust is not sustained by continuing deposits. 



PARADIGMS OF INTERDEPENDENCE 189 

a marriage will deteriorate. Instead of rich, spontaneous under- 
standing and communication, the situation becomes one of accom- 
modation, where two people simply attempt to live independent 
life-styles in a fairly respectful and tolerant way. The relationship 
may further deteriorate to one of hostility and defensiveness. The 
"fight or flight" response creates verbal battles, slammed doors, 
refusal to talk, emotional withdrawal and self-pity. It may end up 
in a cold war at home, sustained only by children, sex, social 
pressure, or image protection. Or it may end up in open warfare in 
the courts, where bitter ego decimating legal battles can be carried 
on for years as people endlessly confess the sins of a former 
spouse. 

And this is in the most intimate, the most potentially rich, joyful, 
satisfying and productive relationship possible between two peo- 
ple on this earth. The P/PC lighthouse is there; we can either break 
ourselves against it or we can use it as a guiding light. 

Our most constant relationships, like marriage, require our most 
constant deposits. With continuing expectations, old deposits 
evaporate. If you suddenly run into an old high school friend you 
haven't seen for years, you can pick up right where you left off 
because the earlier deposits are still there. But your accounts with 
the people you interact with on a regular basis require more 
constant investment. There are sometimes automatic withdrawals 
in your daily interactions or in their perception of you that you 
don't even know about. This is especially true with teenagers in 
the home. 

Suppose you have a teenage son and your normal conversation 
is something like, "Clean your room. Button your shirt. Turn 
down the radio. Go get a haircut. And don't forget to take out the 
garbage!" Over a period of time, the withdrawals far exceed the 
deposits. 

Now, suppose this son is in the process of making some 
important decisions that will affect the rest of his life. But the trust 
level is so low and the communication process so closed, mechan- 
ical, and unsatisfying that he simply will not be open to your 
counsel. You may have the wisdom and the knowledge to help 
him, but because your account is so overdrawn, he will end up 
making his decisions from a short-range emotional perspective, 
which may well result in many negative long-range consequences. 

You need a positive balance to communicate on these tender 
issues. What do you do? 

What would happen if you started making deposits into the 



190 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

relationship? Maybe the opportunity comes up to do him a little 
kindness — to bring home a magazine on skateboarding, if that's 
his interest, or just to w^alk up to him when he's working on a 
project and offer to help. Perhaps you could invite him to go to a 
movie with you or take him out for some ice cream. Probably the 
most important deposit you could make would be just to listen, 
without judging or preaching or reading your own autobiography 
into what he says. Just listen and seek to understand. Let him feel 
your concern for him, your acceptance of him as a person. 

He may not respond at first. He may even be suspicious. 
"What's Dad up to now? What technique is Mom trying on me this 
time?" But as those genuine deposits keep coming, they begin to 
add up. That overdrawn balance is shrinking. 

Remember that quick fix is a mirage. Building and repairing 
relationships takes time. If you become impatient with his apparent 
lack of response or his seeming ingratitude, you may make huge 
withdrawals and undo all the good you've done. "After all we've 
done for you, the sacrifices we've made, how can you be so 
ungrateful? We try to be nice and you act like this. I can't believe 
it!" 

It's hard not to get impatient. It takes character to be proactive, 
to focus on your Circle of Influence, to nurture growing things, 
and not to "pull up the flowers to see how the roots are coming." 

But there really is no quick fix. Building and repairing relation- 
ships are a long-term investments. 

Six Major Deposits 

Let me suggest six major deposits that build the Emotional Bank 
Account. 

Understanding the Individual 

Really seeking to understand another person is probably one of 
the most important deposits you can make, and it is the key to 
every other deposit. You simply don't know what constitutes a 
deposit to another person until you understand that individual. 
What might be a deposit for you — going for a walk to talk things 
over, going out for ice cream together, working on a common 
project — might not be perceived by someone else as a deposit at 
all. It might even be perceived as a withdrawal, if it doesn't touch 
the person's deep interests or needs. 

One person's mission is another person's minutia. To make a 



PARADIGMS OF INTERDEPENDENCE 191 

deposit, what is important to another person must be as important 
to you as the other person is to you. You may be working on a high 
priority project when your six-year-old child interrupts with some- 
thing that seems trivial to you, but it may be very important from 
his point of view. It takes Habit 2 to recognize and recommit 
yourself to the value of that person and Habit 3 to subordinate your 
schedule to that human priority. By accepting the value he places 
on what he has to say, you show an understanding of him that 
makes a great deposit. 

I have a friend whose son developed an avid interest in baseball. 
My friend wasn't interested in baseball at all. But one summer, he 
took his son to see every major league team play one game. The 
trip took over six weeks and cost a great deal of money, but it 
became a powerful bonding experience in their relationship. 

My friend was asked on his return, "Do you like baseball that 
much?" 

"No," he replied, "but I like my son that much." 

I have another friend, a college professor, who had a terrible 
relationship with his teenage son. This man's entire life was 
essentially academic, and he felt his son was totally wasting his life 
by working with his hands instead of working to develop his mind. 
As a result, he was almost constantly on the boy's back, and, in 
moments of regret, he would try to make deposits that just didn't 
work. The boy perceived the gestures as new forms of rejection, 
comparison, and judgment, and they precipitated huge withdraw- 
als. The relationship was turning sour, and it was breaking the 
father's heart. 

One day I shared with him this principle of making what is 
important to the other person as important to you as the other 
person is to you. He took it deeply to heart. He engaged his son in 
a project to build a miniature Wall of China around their home. It 
was a consuming project, and they worked side by side on it for 
over a year and a half. 

Through that bonding experience, the son moved through that 
phase in his life and into an increased desire to develop his mind. 
But the real benefit was what happened to the relationship. Instead 
of a sore spot, it became a source of joy and strength to both father 
and son. 



192 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Our tendency is to project out of our own autobiographies what 
we think other people want or need. We project our intentions on 
the behavior of others. We interpret what constitutes a deposit 
based on our own needs and desires, either now or when we were 
at a similar age or stage in life. If they don't interpret our effort as 
a deposit, our tendency is to take it as a rejection of our well 
intentioned effort and to give up. 

The Golden Rule says to "Do unto others as you would have 
others do unto you." While on the surface that could mean to do 
for them what you would like to have done for you, I think the 
more essential meaning is to understand them deeply as individ- 
uals, the way you would want to be understood, and then to treat 
them in terms of that understanding. As one successful parent said 
about raising children, "Treat them all the same by treating them 
differently." 

Attending to the Little Things 

The little kindnesses and courtesies are so important. Small 
discourtesies, little unkindnesses, little forms of disrespect make 
large withdrawals. In relationships, the big things are the little 
things. 

I remember an evening I spent with two of my sons some years 
ago. It was an organized father and son outing, complete with 
gymnastics, wrestling matches, hotdogs, orangeade, and a 
movie — the works. 

In the middle of the movie, Sean, who was then four years old, 
fell asleep in his seat. His older brother, Stephen, who was six, 
stayed awake, and we watched the rest of the movie together. 
When it was over, I picked Sean up in my arms, carried him out to 
the car and laid him in the back seat. It was very cold that night, so 
I took off my coat and gently arranged it over and around him. 

When we arrived home, I quickly carried Sean in and tucked him 
into bed. After Stephen put on his "jammies" and brushed his 
teeth, I lay down next to him to talk about the night out together. 

"How'd you like it, Stephen?" 

"Fine," he answered. 

"Did you have fun?" 

"Yes." 

"What did you like most?" 

"I don't know. The trampoline, I guess." 



PARADIGMS OF INTERDEPENDENCE 193 

"That was quite a thing, wasn't it — doing those somersaults and 
tricks in the air like that?" 

There wasn't much response on his part. I found myself making 
conversation. I wondered why Stephen wouldn't open up more. 
He usually did when exciting things happened. I was a httle 
disappointed. I sensed something was wrong; he had been so quiet 
on the way home and getting ready for bed. 

Suddenly Stephen turned over on his side, facing the wall. I 
wondered why and lifted myself up just enough to see his eyes 
welling up with tears. 

"What's wrong, honey? What is it?" 

He turned back, and I could sense he was feeling some embar- 
rassment for the tears and his quivering lips and chin. 

"Daddy, if I were cold, would you put your coat around me, 
too?" 

Of all the events of that special night out together, the most 
important was a little act of kindness — a momentary, unconscious 
showing of love to his little brother. 

What a powerful, personal lesson that experience was to me 
then and is even now. People are very tender, very sensitive 
inside. I don't believe age or experience makes much difference. 
Inside, even within the most toughened and calloused exteriors, 
are the tender feelings and emotions of the heart. 

Keeping Commitments 

Keeping a commitment or a promise is a major deposit; breaking 
one is a major withdrawal. In fact, there's probably not a more 
massive withdrawal than to make a promise that's important to 
someone and then not to come through. The next time a promise 
is made, they won't believe it. People tend to build their hopes 
around promises, particularly promises about their basic liveli- 
hood. 

I've tried to adopt a philosophy as a parent never to make a 
promise I don't keep. I therefore try to make them very carefully, 
very sparingly, and to be aware of as many variables and contin- 
gencies as possible so that something doesn't suddenly come up to 
keep me from fulfilling it. 

Occasionally, despite all my effort, the unexpected does come 
up, creating a situation where it would be unwise or impossible to 
keep a promise I've made. But I value that promise. I either keep 



194 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

it anyw^ay, or explain the situation thoroughly to the person 
involved and ask to be released from the promise. 

I believe that if you cultivate the habit of always keeping the 
promises you make, you build bridges of trust that span the gaps 
of understanding between you and your child. Then, when your 
child wants to do something you don't want him to do, and out of 
your maturity you can see consequences that the child cannot see, 
you can say, "Son, if you do this, I promise you that this will be the 
result." If that child has cultivated trust in your word, in your 
promises, he will act on your counsel. 

Clarifying Expectations 

Imagine the difficulty you might encounter if you and your boss 
had different assumptions regarding whose role it was to create 
your job description. 

"When am I going to get my job description?" you might ask. 

"I've been waiting for you to bring one to me so that we could 
discuss it," your boss might reply. 

"I thought defining my job was your role." 

"That's not my role at all. Don't you remember? Right from the 
first, I said that how you do in the job largely depends on you." 

"I thought you meant that the quality of my job depended on 
me. But I don't even know what my job really is." 

Unclear expectations in the area of goals also undermine com- 
munication and trust. 

"I did exactly what you asked me to do and here is the report." 

"I don't want a report. The goal was to solve the problem — not 
to analyze it and report on it." 

"I thought the goal was to get a handle on the problem so we 
could delegate it to someone else." 

How many times have we had these kinds of conversations? 

"You said ..." 

"No, you're wrong! I said ..." 

"You did not! You never said I was supposed to ... " 

"Oh, yes I did! I clearly said ..." 

"You never even mentioned ..." 

"But that was our agreement ..." 

The cause of almost all relationship difficulties is rooted in 
conflicting or ambiguous expectations around roles and goals. 
Whether we are dealing with the question of who does what at 
work, how you communicate with your daughter when you tell 



PARADIGMS OF INTERDEPENDENCE 195 

her to clean her room, or who feeds the fish and takes out the 
garbage, we can be certain that unclear expectations will lead to 
misunderstanding, disappointment, and withdrawals of trust. 

Many expectations are implicit. They haven't been explicitly 
stated or announced, but people nevertheless bring them to a 
particular situation. In marriage, for example, a man and a woman 
have implicit expectations of each other in their marriage roles. 
Although these expectations have not been discussed, or some- 
times even recognized by the person who has them, fulfilling them 
makes great deposits in the relationship and violating them makes 
withdrawals. 

That's why it's so important whenever you come into a new 
situation to get all the expectations out on the table. People will 
begin to judge each other through those expectations. And if they 
feel like their basic expectations have been violated, the reserve of 
trust is diminished. We create many negative situations by simply 
assuming that our expectations are self-evident and that they are 
clearly understood and shared by other people. 

The deposit is to make the expectations clear and explicit in the 
beginning. This takes a real investment of time and effort up front, 
but it saves great amounts of time and effort down the road. When 
expectations are not clear and shared, people begin to become 
emotionally involved and simple misunderstandings become com- 
pounded, turning into personality clashes and communication 
breakdowns. 

Clarifying expectations sometimes takes a great deal of courage. 
It seems easier to act as though differences don't exist and to hope 
things will work out than it is to face the differences and work 
together to arrive at a mutually agreeable set of expectations. 

Showing Personal Integrity 

Personal Integrity generates trust and is the basis of many 
different kinds of deposits. 

Lack of integrity can undermine almost any other effort to create 
high trust accounts. People can seek to understand, remember the 
little things, keep their promises, clarify and fulfill expectations, 
and still fail to build reserves of trust if they are inwardly 
duplicitous. 

Integrity includes but goes beyond honesty. Honesty is telling 
the truth — in other words, conforming our words to reality. Integrity 
is conforming reality to our words — in other words, keeping promises 



196 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

and fulfilling expectations. This requires an integrated character, a 
oneness, primarily with self but also with life. 

One of the most important ways to manifest integrity is to be loyal 
to those who are not present. In doing so, we build the trust of those 
who are present. When you defend those who are absent, you 
retain the trust of those present. 

Suppose you and I were talking alone, and we were criticizing 
our supervisor in a way that we would not dare to do if he were 
present. Now what will happen when you and I have a falling out? 
You know I'm going to be discussing your weaknesses with 
someone else. That's what you and I did behind our supervisor's 
back. You know my nature. I'll sweet- talk you to your face and 
bad-mouth you behind your back. You've seen me do it. 

That's the essence of duplicity. Does that build a reserve of trust 
in my account with you? 

On the other hand, suppose you were to start criticizing our 
supervisor and I basically told you I agree with the content of some 
of the criticism and suggest that the two of us go directly to him 
and make an effective presentation on how things might be 
improved. Then what would you know I would do if someone 
were to criticize you to me behind your back? 

For another example, suppose in my effort to build a relationship 
with you, I told you something someone else had shared with me 
in confidence. "I really shouldn't tell you this," I might say, "but 
since you're my friend. ..." Would my betraying another person 
build my trust account with you? Or would you wonder if the 
things you had told me in confidence were being shared with 
others? 

Such duplicity might appear to be making a deposit with the 
person you're with, but it is actually a withdrawal because you 
communicate your own lack of integrity. You may get the golden 
egg of temporary pleasure from putting someone down or sharing 
privileged information, but you're strangling the goose, weakening 
the relationship that provides enduring pleasure in association. 

Integrity in an interdependent reality is simply this: you treat 
everyone by the same set of principles. As you do, people will 
come to trust you. They may not at first appreciate the honest 
confrontational experiences such integrity might generate. Con- 
frontation takes considerable courage, and many people would 
prefer to take the course of least resistance, belittling and criticiz- 
ing, betraying confidences, or participating in gossip about others 



PARADIGMS OF INTERDEPENDENCE 297 

behind their backs. But in the long run, people will trust and 
respect you if you are honest and open and kind with them. You 
care enough to confront. And to be trusted, it is said, is greater 
than to be loved. In the long run, I am convinced, to be trusted will 
be also to be loved. 

When my son Joshua was quite young, he would frequently ask 
me a soul-searching question. Whenever I overreacted to someone 
else or was the least bit impatient or unkind, he was so vulnerable 
and so honest and our relationship was so good that he would 
simply look me in the eye and say, "Dad, do you love me?" If he 
thought I was breaking a basic principle of life toward someone 
else, he wondered if I wouldn't break it with him. 

As a teacher, as well as a parent, I have found that the key to the 
ninety-nine is the one — particularly the one that is testing the 
patience and the good humor of the many. It is the love and the 
discipline of the one student, the one child, that communicates 
love for the others. It's how you treat the one that reveals how you 
regard the ninety-nine, because everyone is ultimately a one. 

Integrity also means avoiding any communication that is decep- 
tive, full of guile, or beneath the dignity of people. "A lie is any 
communication with intent to deceive," according to one definition 
of the word. Whether we communicate with words or behavior, if 
we have integrity, our intent cannot be to deceive. 

Apologizing Sincerely When You Make a Withdrawal 

When we make withdrawals from the Emotional Bank Account, 
we need to apologize and we need to do it sincerely. Great deposits 
come in the sincere words: 

"I was wrong." 

"That was unkind of me." 

"I showed you no respect." 

"I gave you no dignity, and I'm deeply sorry." 

"I embarrassed you in front of your friends and I had no call to 
do that. Even though I wanted to make a point, I never should 
have done it. I apologize." 

It takes a great deal of character strength to apologize quickly out 
of one's heart rather than out of pity. A person must possess 
himself and have a deep sense of security in fundamental principles 
and values in order to genuinely apologize. 

People with Uttle internal security can't do it. It makes them too 



198 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

vulnerable. They feel it makes them appear soft and weak, and 
they fear that others w^ill take advantage of their w^eakness. Their 
security is based on the opinions of other people, and they worry 
about what others might think. In addition, they usually feel 
justified in what they did. They rationalize their own wrong in the 
name of the other person's wrong, and if they apologize at all, it's 
superficial. 

"If you're going to bow, bow low, " says Eastern wisdom. "Pay 
the uttermost farthing," says the Christian ethic. To be a deposit, 
an apology must be sincere. And it must be perceived as sincere. 

Leo Roskin taught, "It is the weak who are cruel. Softness can 
only be expected from the strong." 

I was in my office at home one afternoon writing, of all things, 
on the subject of patience. I could hear the boys running up and 
down the hall making loud banging noises, and I could feel my 
own patience beginning to wane. 

Suddenly, my son David started pounding on the bathroom 
door, yelling at the top of his lungs, "Let me in! Let me in! Let me 
in!" 

I rushed out of the office and spoke to him with great intensity. 
"David, do you have any idea how disturbing that is to me? Do 
you know how hard it is to try to concentrate and write creatively? 
Now, you go into your room and stay in there until you can behave 
yourself." So in he went, dejected, and shut the door. 

As I turned around, I became aware of another problem. The 
boys had been playing tackle football in the four-foot-wide hallway, 
and one of them had been elbowed in the mouth. He was lying 
there in the hall, bleeding from the mouth. David, I discovered, 
had gone to the bathroom to get a wet towel for him. But his sister, 
Maria, who was taking a shower, wouldn't open the door. 

When I realized that I had completely misinterpreted the situa- 
tion and had overreacted, I immediately went in to apologize to 
David. 

As I opened the door, the first thing he said to me was, "I won't 
forgive you." 

"Well, why not, honey?" I replied. "Honestly, I didn't realize 
you were trying to help your brother. Why won't you forgive me?" 

"Because you did the same thing last week," he replied. In other 
words, he was saying, "Dad, you're overdrawn, and you're not 
going to talk your way out of a problem you behaved yourself 
into." 



PARADIGMS OF INTERDEPENDENCE 199 

* * * 

Sincere apologies make deposits; repeated apologies interpreted 
as insincere make withdrawals. And the quality of the relationship 
reflects it. 

It is one thing to make a mistake, and quite another thing not to 
admit it. People will forgive mistakes, because mistakes are usually 
of the mind, mistakes of judgment. But people will not easily 
forgive the mistakes of the heart, the ill intention, the bad motives, 
the prideful justifying cover-up of the first mistake. 

The Laws of Love and the Laws of Life 

When we make deposits of unconditional love, when we live the 
primary laws of love, we encourage others to live the primary laws 
of life. In other words, when we truly love others without 
condition, without strings, we help them feel secure and safe and 
validated and affirmed in their essential worth, identity, and 
integrity. Their natural growth process is encouraged. We make it 
easier for them to live the laws of life — cooperation, contribution, 
self-discipline, integrity — and to discover and live true to the 
highest and best within them. We give them the freedom to act on 
their own inner imperatives rather than react to our conditions and 
limitations. This does not mean we become permissive or soft. 
That itself is a massive withdrawal. We counsel, we plead, we set 
limits and consequences. But we love, regardless. 

When we violate the primary laws of love — when we attach 
strings and conditions to that gift — we actually encourage others to 
violate the primary laws of life. We put them in a reactive, 
defensive position where they feel they have to prove "1 matter as 
a person, independent of you." 

In reality, they aren't independent. They are counter-dependent, 
which is another form of dependency and is at the lowest end of 
the Maturity Continuum. They become reactive, almost enemy- 
centered, more concerned about defending their "rights" and 
producing evidence of their individuahty than they are about 
proactively listening to and honoring their own inner imperatives. 

RebeUion is a knot of the heart, not of the mind. The key is to 
make deposits — constant deposits of unconditional love. 

I once had a friend who was dean of a very prestigious school. 
He planned and saved for years to provide his son the opportunity 



Some of the details of this story have been changed to protect the privacy of those 
involved. 



200 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

to attend that institution, but when the time came, the boy refused 
to go. 

This deeply concerned his father. Graduating from that particu- 
lar school would have been a great asset to the boy. Besides, it was 
a family tradition. Three generations of attendance preceded the 
boy. The father pleaded and urged and talked. He also tried to 
listen to the boy to understand him, all the while hoping that the 
son would change his mind. 

The subtle message being communicated was one of conditional 
love. The son felt that in a sense the father's desire for him to 
attend the school outweighed the value he placed on him as a 
person and as a son, which was terribly threatening. Conse- 
quently, he fought for and with his own identity and integrity, and 
he increased in his resolve and his efforts to rationalize his decision 
not to go. 

After some intense soul-searching, the father decided to make a 
sacrifice — to renounce conditional love. He knew that his son 
might choose differently than he had wished; nevertheless, he and 
his wife resolved to love their son unconditionally, regardless of 
his choice. It was an extremely difficult thing to do because the 
value of his educational experience was so close to their hearts and 
because it was something they had planned and worked for since 
his birth. 

The father and mother went through a very difficult rescripting 
process, struggling to really understand the nature of uncondi- 
tional love. They communicated to the boy what they were doing 
and why, and told him that they had come to the point at which 
they could say in all honesty that his decision would not affect their 
complete feeling of unconditional love toward him. They didn't do 
this to manipulate him, to try to get him to "shape up." They did 
it as the logical extension of their growth and character. 

The boy didn't give much of a response at the time, but his 
parents had such a paradigm of unconditional love at that point 
that it would have made no difference in their feelings for him. 
About a week later, he told his parents that he had decided not to 
go. They were perfectly prepared for this response and continued 
to show unconditional love for him. Everything was settled and life 
went along normally. 

A short time later, an interesting thing happened. Now that the 
boy no longer felt he had to defend his position, he searched 
within himself more deeply and found that he really did want to 
have this educational experience. He applied for admission, and 



PARADIGMS OF INTERDEPENDENCE 202 

then he told his father, who again showed unconditional love by 
fully accepting his son's decision. My friend was happy, but not 
excessively so, because he had truly learned to love without 
condition. 

Dag Hammarskjold, past Secretary-General of the United Na- 
tions, once made a profound, far-reaching statement: "It is more 
noble to give yourself completely to one individual than to labor 
diligently for the salvation of the masses." 

I take that to mean that I could devote eight, ten, or twelve hours 
a day, five, six, or seven days a week to the thousands of people 
and projects "out there" and still not have a deep, meaningful 
relationship with my own spouse, with my own teenage son, with 
my closest working associate. And it would take more nobility of 
character — more humihty, courage, and strength — to rebuild that 
one relationship than it would to continue putting in all those 
hours for all those people and causes. 

In twenty-five years of consulting with organizations, I have 
been impressed over and over again by the power of that state- 
ment. Many of the problems in organizations stem from relation- 
ship difficulties at the very top — between two partners in a 
professional firm, between the owner and the president of a 
company, between the president and an executive vice-president. 
It truly takes more nobility of character to confront and resolve 
those issues than it does to continue to diligently work for the 
many projects and people "out there." 

When I first came across Hammarskjold's statement, I was 
working in an organization where there were unclear expectations 
between the individual who was my right-hand man and myself. I 
simply did not have the courage to confront our differences 
regarding role and goal expectations and values, particularly in our 
methods of administration. So I worked for a number of months in 
a compromise mode to avoid what might turn out to be an ugly 
confrontation. All the while, bad feelings were developing inside 
both of us. 

After reading that it is more noble to give yourself completely to 
one individual than to labor diligently for the salvation of the 
masses, I was deeply affected by the idea of rebuilding that 
relationship. 

I had to steel myself for what lay ahead, because I knew it would 
be hard to really get the issues out and to achieve a deep, common 



202 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

understanding and commitment. I remember actually shaking in 
anticipation of the visit. He seemed like such a hard man, so set in 
his own ways and so right in his own eyes; yet I needed his 
strengths and abilities. I was afraid a confrontation might jeopar- 
dize the relationship and result in my losing those strengths. 

I went through a mental dress rehearsal of the anticipated visit, 
and I finally became settled within myself around the principles 
rather than the practices of what I was going to do and say. At last 
I felt peace of mind and the courage to have the communication. 

When we met together, to my total surprise, I discovered that 
this man had been going through the very same process and had 
been longing for such a conversation. He was anything but hard 
and defensive. 

Nevertheless, our administrative styles were considerably differ- 
ent, and the entire organization was responding to these differ- 
ences. We both acknowledged the problems that our disunity had 
created. Over several visits, we were able to confront the deeper 
issues, to get them all out on the table, and to resolve them, one by 
one, with a spirit of high mutual respect. We were able to develop 
a powerful complementary team and a deep personal affection 
which added tremendously to our ability to work effectively 
together. 

Creating the unity necessary to run an effective business or a 
family or a marriage requires great personal strength and courage. 
No amount of technical administrative skill in laboring for the 
masses can make up for lack of nobility of personal character in 
developing relationships. It is at a very essential, one-on-one level, 
that we live the primary laws of love and life. 

P Problems Are PC Opportunities 

This experience also taught me another powerful paradigm of 
interdependence. It deals with the way in which we see problems. 
I had lived for months trying to avoid the problem, seeing it as a 
source of irritation, a stumbling block, and wishing it would 
somehow go away. But, as it turned out, the very problem created 
the opportunity to build a deep relationship that empowered us to 
work together as a strong complementary team. 

I suggest that in an interdependent situation, every P problem is a 
PC opportunity — a chance to build the Emotional Bank Accounts 
that significantly affect interdependent production. 



PARADIGMS OF INTERDEPENDENCE 203 

When parents see their children's problems as opportunities to 
build the relationship instead of as negative, burdensome irrita- 
tions, it totally changes the nature of parent-child interaction. 
Parents become more willing, even excited, about deeply under- 
standing and helping their children. When a child comes to them 
with a problem, instead of thinking, "Oh, no! Not another prob- 
lem!" their paradigm is, "Here is a great opportunity for me to 
really help my child and to invest in our relationship." Many 
interactions change from transactional to transformational, and 
strong bonds of love and trust are created as children sense the 
value parents give to their problems and to them as individuals. 

This paradigm is powerful in business as well. One department 
store chain that operates from this paradigm has created a great 
loyalty among its customers. Any time a customer comes into the 
store with a problem, no matter how small, the clerks immediately 
see it as an opportunity to build the relationship with the customer. 
They respond with a cheerful, positive desire to solve the problem 
in a way that will make the customer happy. They treat the customer 
with such grace and respect, giving such second-mile service, that 
many of the customers don't even think of going anywhere else. 

By recognizing that the P/PC balance is necessary to effectiveness 
in an interdependent reality, we can value our problems as 
opportunities to increase PC. 

The Habits of Interdependence 

With the paradigm of the Emotional Bank Account in mind, 
we're ready to move into the habits of Public Victory, of success in 
working with other people. As we do, we can see how these habits 
work together to create effective interdependence. We can also see 
how powerfully scripted we are in other patterns of thought and 
behavior. 

In addition, we can see on an even deeper level that effective 
interdependence can only be achieved by truly independent peo- 
ple. It is impossible to achieve Public Victory with popular "Win/ 
Win negotiation" techniques or "reflective listening" techniques or 
"creative problem-solving" techniques that focus on personality 
and truncate the vital character base. 

Let's now focus on each of the Public Victory habits in depth. 



Habit 4 
Think Win/Win 

Principles of Interpersonal Leadership 




Dependence 



204 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/wIN 205 



We have committed the Golden Rule to memory; 
let us now commit it to life. 

Edwin Markham 



ONE TIME I WAS ASKED TO WORK WITH A COMPANY whosc president was 
very concerned about the lack of cooperation among his 
people. 

"Our basic problem, Stephen, is that they're selfish," he said. 
"They just won't cooperate. I know if they would cooperate, we 
could produce so much more. Can you help us develop a human 
relations program that will solve the problem?" 

"Is your problem the people or the paradigm?" I asked. 

"Look for yourself," he rephed. 

So I did. And I found that there was a real selfishness, an 
unwillingness to cooperate, a resistance to authority, defensive 
communication. I could see that overdrawn Emotional Bank Ac- 
counts had created a culture of low trust. But 1 pressed the 
question. 

"Let's look at it deeper," I suggested. "Why don't your people 
cooperate? What is the reward for not cooperating?" 

"There's no reward for not cooperating," he assured me. "The 
rewards are much greater if they do cooperate." 

"Are they?" I asked. Behind a curtain on one wall of this man's 
office was a chart. On the chart were a number of racehorses all 
lined up on a track. Superimposed on the face of each horse was 
the face of one of his managers. At the end of the track was a 



206 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

beautiful travel poster of Bermuda, an idyllic picture of blue skies 
and fleecy clouds and a romantic couple w^alking hand in hand 
dow^n a white sandy beach. 

Once a w^eek, this man v^ould bring all his people into this office 
and talk cooperation. "Let's all work together. We'll all make more 
money if we do. " Then he would pull the curtain and show them the 
chart. "Now which of you is going to win the trip to Bermuda?" 

It was like telling one flower to grow and watering another, like 
saying "firings will continue until morale improves." He wanted 
cooperation. He wanted his people to work together, to share 
ideas, to all benefit from the effort. But he was setting them up in 
competition with each other. One manager's success meant failure 
for the other managers. 

As with many, many problems between people in business, 
family, and other relationships, the problem in this company was 
the result of a flawed paradigm. The president was trying to get the 
fruits of cooperation from a paradigm of competition. And when it 
didn't work, he wanted a technique, a program, a quick fix 
antidote to make his people cooperate. 

But you can't change the fruit without changing the root. 
Working on the attitudes and behaviors would have been hacking 
at the leaves. So we focused instead on producing personal and 
organizational excellence in an entirely different way by developing 
information and reward systems which reinforced the value of 
cooperation. 

Whether you are the president of a company or the janitor, the 
moment you step from independence into interdependence in any 
capacity, you step into a leadership role. You are in a position of 
influencing other people. And the habit of effective interpersonal 
leadership is Think Win/Win. 

Six Paradigms of Human Interaction 

WinAVin is not a technique; it's a total philosophy of human 
interaction. In fact, it is one of six paradigms of interaction. The 
alternative paradigms are Win/Lose, LoseAVin, Lose/Lose, Win, 
and WinAVin or No Deal. 

• WinAVin • Lose/Lose 

• Win/Lose • Win 

• LoseAVin • WinAVin or No Deal 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/wIN 207 

Win/Win 

Win/Win is a frame of mind and heart that constantly seeks 
mutual benefit in all human interactions. Win/Win means that 
agreements or solutions are mutually beneficial, mutually satisfy- 
ing. With a Win/Win solution, all parties feel good about the 
decision and feel committed to the action plan. Win/Win sees life as 
a cooperative, not a competitive arena. Most people tend to think 
in terms of dichotomies: strong or weak, hardball or softball, win 
or lose. But that kind of thinking is fundamentally flawed. It's 
based on power and position rather than on principle. WinAVin is 
based on the paradigm that there is plenty for everybody, that one 
person's success is not achieved at the expense or exclusion of the 
success of others. 

Win/Win is a belief in the Third Alternative. It's not your way or 
my way; it's a better way, a higher way. 

Win/Lose 

One alternative to Win/Win is Win/Lose, the paradigm of the 
race to Bermuda. It says "If I win, you lose." 

In leadership style, Win/Lose is the authoritarian approach: "I 
get my way; you don't get yours." Win/Lose people are prone to 
use position, power, credentials, possessions, or personality to get 
their way. 

Most people have been deeply scripted in the Win/Lose mental- 
ity since birth. First and most important of the powerful forces at 
work is the family. When one child is compared with another — 
when patience, understanding or love is given or withdrawn on 
the basis of such comparisons — people are into Win/Lose thinking. 
Whenever love is given on a conditional basis, when someone has 
to earn love, what's being communicated to them is that they are 
not intrinsically valuable or lovable. Value does not lie inside them, 
it lies outside. It's in comparison with somebody else or against 
some expectation. 

And what happens to a young mind and heart, highly vulnera- 
ble, highly dependent upon the support and emotional affirmation 
of the parents, in the face of conditional love? The child is molded, 
shaped, and programmed in the Win/Lose mentality. 

"If I'm better than my brother, my parents will love me more." 

"My parents don't love me as much as they love my sister. I 
must not be as valuable." 

Another powerful scripting agency is the peer group. A child 



208 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

first wants acceptance from his parents and then from his peers, 
whether they be sibhngs or friends. And we all know how cruel 
peers sometimes can be. They often accept or reject totally on the 
basis of conformity to their expectations and norms, providing 
additional scripting toward Win/Lose. 

The academic world reinforces Win/Lose scripting. The "normal 
distribution curve" basically says that you got an "A" because 
someone else got a "C." It interprets an individual's value by 
comparing him or her to everyone else. No recognition is given to 
intrinsic value; everyone is extrinsically defined. 

"Oh, how nice to see you here at our PTA meeting. You ought 
to be really proud of your daughter, Caroline. She's in the upper 10 
percent." 

"That makes me feel good." 

"But your son, Johnny, is in trouble. He's in the lower quartile." 

"Really? Oh, that's terrible! What can we do about it?" 

What this kind of comparative information doesn't tell you is 
that perhaps Johnny is going on all eight cylinders while Caroline 
is coasting on four of her eight. But people are not graded against 
their potential or against the full use of their present capacity. They 
are graded in relation to other people. And grades are carriers of 
social value; they open doors of opportunity or they close them. 
Competition, not cooperation, lies at the core of the educational 
process. Cooperation, in fact, is usually associated with cheating. 

Another powerful programming agent is athletics, particularly 
for young men in their high school or college years. Often they 
develop the basic paradigm that life is a big game, a zero sum game 
where some win and some lose. "Winning" is "beating" in the 
athletic arena. 

Another agent is law. We live in a litigious society. The first 
thing many people think about when they get into trouble is suing 
someone, taking them to court, "winning" at someone else's 
expense. But defensive minds are neither creative nor cooperative. 

Certainly we need law or else society will deteriorate. It provides 
survival, but it doesn't create synergy. At best it results in 
compromise. Law is based on an adversarial concept. The recent 
trend of encouraging lawyers and law schools to focus on peaceable 
negotiation, the techniques of Win/Win, and the use of private 
courts, may not provide the ultimate solution, but it does reflect a 
growing awareness of the problem. 

Certainly there is a place for Win/Lose thinking in truly compet- 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/wIN 209 

itive and low-trust situations. But most of life is not a competition. 
We don't have to live each day competing with our spouse, our 
children, our coworkers, our neighbors, and our friends. "Who's 
winning in your marriage?'" is a ridiculous question. If both people 
aren't winning, both are losing. 

Most of life is an interdependent, not an independent, reality. 
Most results you want depend on cooperation between you and 
others. And the Win/Lose mentality is dysfunctional to that 
cooperation. 

Lose/Win 

Some people are programmed the other way — LoseAVin. 

"I lose, you win." 

"Go ahead. Have your way with me." 

"Step on me again. Everyone does." 

"I'm a loser. I've always been a loser." 

"I'm a peacemaker. I'll do anything to keep peace." 

Lose/Win is worse than Win/Lose because it has no standards — 
no demands, no expectations, no vision. People who think Lose/ 
Win are usually quick to please or appease. They seek strength 
from popularity or acceptance. They have little courage to express 
their own feelings and convictions and are easily intimidated by 
the ego strength of others. 

In negotiation, LoseAVin is seen as capitulation — giving in or 
giving up. In leadership style, it's permissiveness or indulgence. 
LoseAVin means being a nice guy, even if "nice guys finish last." 

Win/Lose people love LoseAVin people because they can feed on 
them. They love their weaknesses — they take advantage of them. 
Such weaknesses complement their strengths. 

But the problem is that LoseAVin people bury a lot of feelings. 
And unexpressed feelings never die: they're buried alive and come 
forth later in uglier ways. Psychosomatic illnesses, particularly of 
the respiratory, nervous, and circulatory systems often are the 
reincarnation of cumulative resentment, deep disappointment and 
disillusionment repressed by the LoseAVin mentality. Dispropor- 
tionate rage or anger, overreaction to minor provocation, and 
cynicism are other embodiments of suppressed emotion. 

People who are constantly repressing, not transcending feelings 
towards a higher meaning find that it affects the quality of their 
self-esteem and eventually the quality of their relationships with 
others. 



210 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Both Win/Lose and LoseAVin are w^eak positions, based in 
personal insecurities. In the short run, Win/Lose will produce more 
results because it draws on the often considerable strengths and 
talents of the people at the top. Lose/Win is weak and chaotic from 
the outset. 

Many executives, managers, and parents swing back and forth, 
as if on a pendulum, from Win/Lose inconsideration to LoseAVin 
indulgence. When they can't stand confusion and lack of structure, 
direction, expectation, and discipline any longer, they swing back 
to Win/Lose — until guilt undermines their resolve and drives them 
back to Lose/Win — until anger and frustration drive them back to 
Win/Lose again. 

Lose/Lose 

When two Win/Lose people get together — that is, when two 
determined, stubborn, ego-invested individuals interact — the re- 
sult will be Lose/Lose. Both will lose. Both will become vindictive 
and want to "get back" or "get even," blind to the fact that murder 
is suicide, that revenge is a two-edged sword. 

I know of a divorce in which the husband was directed by the 
judge to sell the assets and turn over half the proceeds to his 
ex- wife. In compliance, he sold a car worth over $10,000 for $50 
and gave $25 to the wife. When the wife protested, the court clerk 
checked on the situation and discovered that the husband was 
proceeding in the same manner systematically through all of the 
assets. 

Some people become so centered on an enemy, so totally 
obsessed with the behavior of another person that they become 
blind to everything except their desire for that person to lose, even 
if it means losing themselves. Lose/Lose is the philosophy of 
adversarial conflict, the philosophy of war. 

Lose/Lose is also the philosophy of the highly dependent person 
without inner direction who is miserable and thinks everyone else 
should be, too. "If nobody ever wins, perhaps being a loser isn't so 
bad." 

Win 

Another common alternative is simply to think Win. People with 
the Win mentality don't necessarily want someone else to lose. 
That's irrelevant. What matters is that they get what they want. 

When there is no sense of contest or competition. Win is 
probably the most common approach in everyday negotiation. A 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/wIN 211 

person with the Win mentality thinks in terms of securing his own 
ends — and leaving it to others to secure theirs. 

Which Option Is Best? 

Of these five philosophies discussed so far — WinAVin, Win/ 
Lose, Lose/Win, Lose/Lose, and Win — which is the most effective? 
The answer is, "It depends." If you win a football game, that 
means the other team loses. If you work in a regional office that is 
miles away from another regional office, and you don't have any 
functional relationship between the offices, you may want to 
compete in a Win/Lose situation to stimulate business. However, 
you would not want to set up a Win/Lose situation like the "Race 
to Bermuda" contest within a company or in a situation where you 
need cooperation among people or groups of people to achieve 
maximum success. 

If you value a relationship and the issue isn't really that 
important, you may want to go for Lose/Win in some circumstances 
to genuinely affirm the other person. "What I want isn't as 
important to me as my relationship with you. Let's do it your way 
this time." You might also go for LoseAVin if you feel the expense 
of time and effort to achieve a win of any kind would violate other 
higher values. Maybe it just isn't worth it. 

There are circumstances in which you would want to Win, and 
you wouldn't be highly concerned with the relationship of that win 
to others. If your child's life were in danger, for example, you 
might be peripherally concerned about other people and circum- 
stances. But saving that life would be supremely important. 

The best choice, then, depends on reality. The challenge is to 
read that reality accurately and not to translate Win/Lose or other 
scripting into every situation. 

Most situahons, in fact, are part of an interdependent reality, 
and then WinA^^in is really the only viable alternative of the five. 

Win/Lose is not viable because, although I appear to win in a 
confrontation with you, your feelings, your attitudes toward me 
and our relationship have been affected. If I am a supplier to your 
company, for example, and I win on my terms in a particular 
negotiation, I may get what I want now. But will you come to me 
again? My short-term Win will really be a long-term Lose if I don't 
get your repeat business. So an interdependent Win/Lose is really 
Lose/Lose in the long run. 

If we come up with a LoseAVin, you may appear to get what you 



222 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

want for the moment. But how^ will that affect my attitude about 
working with you, about fulfilling the contract? I may not feel as 
anxious to please you. I may carry battle scars with me into any 
future negotiations. My attitude about you and your company may 
be spread as I associate with others in the industry. So we're into 
Lose/Lose again. Lose/Lose obviously isn't viable in any context. 

And if I focus on my own Win and don't even consider your 
point of view, there's no basis for any kind of productive relation- 
ship. 

In the long run, if it isn't a win for both of us, we both lose. 
That's why WinAVin is the only real alternative in interdependent 
realities. 

I worked with a client once, the president of a large chain of 
retail stores, who said, "Stephen, this Win/Win idea sounds good, 
but it is so idealistic. The tough, reahstic business world isn't like 
that. There's Win/Lose everywhere, and if you're not out there 
playing the game, you just can't make it." 

"All right," I said, "try going for Win/Lose with your customers. 
Is that realistic?" 

"Well, no," he replied. 

"Why not?" 

"I'd lose my customers." 

"Then, go for Lose/Win — give the store away. Is that reahstic?" 

"No. No margin, no mission." 

As we considered the various alternatives, Win/Win appeared to 
be the only truly realistic approach. 

"I guess that's true with customers," he admitted, "but not with 
supphers." 

"You are the customer of the supplier," I said. "Why doesn't the 
same principle apply?" 

"Well, we recently renegotiated our lease agreements with the 
mall operators and owners," he said. "We went in with a WinA/Vin 
attitude. We were open, reasonable, conciliatory. But they saw that 
position as being soft and weak, and they took us to the cleaners." 

"Well, why did you go for Lose/Win?" I asked. 

"We didn't. We went for Win/Win." 

"I thought you said they took you to the cleaners." 

"They did." 

"In other words, you lost." 

"That's right." 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/WIN 213 

"And they won." 

"That's right." 

"So what's that called?" 

When he realized that what he had called WinAA^in was really 
LosefWin, he was shocked. And as we examined the long-term 
impact of that LoseAVin, the suppressed feelings, the trampled 
values, the resentment that seethed under the surface of the 
relationship, we agreed that it was really a loss for both parties in 
the end. 

If this man had had a real WinAVin attitude, he would have 
stayed longer in the communication process, listened to the mall 
owner more, then expressed his point of view with more courage. 
He would have continued in the WinA/Vin spirit until a solution 
was reached they both felt good about. And that solution, that 
Third Alternative, would have been synergistic — probably some- 
thing neither of them had thought of on his own. 

Win/Win or No Deal 

If these individuals had not come up with a synergistic solution — 
one that was agreeable to both — they could have gone for an even 
higher expression of WinAVin — WinAVin or No Deal. 

No Deal basically means that if we can't find a solution that 
would benefit us both, we agree to disagree agreeably — No Deal. 
No expectations have been created, no performance contracts 
established. I don't hire you or we don't take on a particular 
assignment together because it's obvious that our values or our 
goals are going in opposite directions. It is so much better to realize 
this up front instead of downstream when expectations have been 
created and both parties have been disillusioned. 

When you have No Deal as an option in your mind, you feel 
liberated because you have no need to manipulate people, to push 
your own agenda, to drive for what you want. You can be open. 
You can really try to understand the deeper issues underlying the 
positions. 

With No Deal as an option, you can honestly say, "I only want 
to go for WinAVin. I want to win, and I want you to win. I wouldn't 
want to get my way and have you not feel good about it, because 
downstream it would eventually surface and create a withdrawal. 
On the other hand, I don't think you would feel good if you got 
your way and I gave in. So let's work for a WinAVin. Let's really 
hammer it out. And if we can't find it, then let's agree that we 



214 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

won't make a deal at all. It would be better not to deal than to live 
with a decision that wasn't right for us both. Then maybe another 
time we might be able to get together." 

Some time after learning the concept of Win/Win or No Deal, the 
president of a small computer software company shared with me 
the following experience. 

"We had developed new software which we sold on a five-year 
contract to a particular bank. The bank president was excited about 
it, but his people weren't really behind the decision. 

"About a month later, that bank changed presidents. The new 
president came to me and said, T am uncomfortable with these 
software conversions. I have a mess on my hands. My people are 
all saying that they can't go through this and I really feel I just can't 
push it at this point in time.' 

"My own company was in deep financial trouble. I knew I had 
every legal right to enforce the contract. But I had become 
convinced of the value of the principle of WinAVin. 

"So I told him 'We have a contract. Your bank has secured our 
products and our services to convert you to this program. But we 
understand that you're not happy about it. So what we'd like to do 
is give you back the contract, give you back your deposit, and if 
you are ever looking for a software solution in the future, come 
back and see us.' 

"I literally walked away from an $84,000 contract. It was close to 
financial suicide. But I felt that, in the long run, if the principle 
were true, it would come back and pay dividends. 

"Three months later, the new president called me. 'I'm now 
going to make changes in my data processing,' he said, 'and I want 
to do business with you.' He signed a contract for $240,000." 

Anything less than Win/Win in an interdependent reality is a 
poor second best that will have impact in the long-term relation- 
ship. The cost of that impact needs to be carefully considered. If 
you can't reach a true WinAVin, you're very often better off to go 
for No Deal. 

Win/Win or No Deal provides tremendous emotional freedom in 
the family relationship. If family members can't agree on a video 
that everyone will enjoy, they can simply decide to do something 
else — No Deal — rather than having some enjoy the evening at the 
expense of others. 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/wIN 215 

* * * 

I have a friend whose family has been involved in singing 
together for several years. When they were young, she arranged 
the music, made the costumes, accompanied them on the piano 
and directed the performances. 

As the children grew older, their taste in music began to change 
and they wanted to have more say in what they performed and 
what they wore. They became less responsive to direction. 

Because she had years of experience in performing herself and 
felt closer to the needs of the older people at the rest homes where 
they planned to perform, she didn't feel that many of the ideas 
they were suggesting would be appropriate. At the same time, 
however, she recognized their need to express themselves and to 
be part of the decision-making process. 

So she set up a WinA/Vin or No Deal. She told them she wanted 
to arrive at an agreement that everyone felt good about — or they 
would simply find other ways to enjoy their talents. As a result, 
everyone felt free to express his or her feelings and ideas as they 
worked to set up a Win/Win agreement, knowing that whether or 
not they could agree, there would be no emotional strings. 

The WinAVin or No Deal approach is most realistic at the 
beginning of a business relationship or enterprise. In a continuing 
business relationship. No Deal may not be a viable option, which 
can create serious problems, especially for family businesses or 
businesses that are begun initially on the basis of friendship. 

In an effort to preserve the relationship, people sometimes go on 
for years making one compromise after another, thinking Win/ 
Lose or LoseA/Vin even while talking WinA/Vin. This creates serious 
problems for the people and for the business, particularly if the 
competition operates on Win/Win and synergy. 

Without No Deal, many such businesses simply deteriorate and 
either fail or have to be turned over to professional managers. 
Experience shows that it is often better in setting up a family 
business or a business between friends to acknowledge the possi- 
bility of No Deal downstream and to establish some kind of 
buy/sell agreement so that the business can prosper without 
permanently damaging the relationship. 

Of course there are some relationships where No Deal is not 
viable. I wouldn't abandon my child or my spouse and go for No 
Deal (it would be better, if necessary, to go for compromise — a low 



216 



THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



form of Win/Win). But in many cases, it is possible to go into 
negotiation with a full Win/Win or No Deal attitude. And the 
freedom in that attitude is incredible. 

Five Dimensions of Win/Win 

Think WinAVin is the habit of interpersonal leadership. It 
involves the exercise of each of the unique human endowments — 
self-awareness, imagination, conscience, and independent will — in 
our relationships with others. It involves mutual learning, mutual 
influence, mutual benefits. 

It takes great courage as well as consideration to create these 
mutual benefits, particularly if we're interacting with others who 
are deeply scripted in Win/Lose. 

That is why this habit involves principles of interpersonal 
leadership. Effective interpersonal leadership requires the vision, 
the proactive initiative and the security, guidance, wisdom, and 
power that come from principle-centered personal leadership. 

The principle of Win/Win is fundamental to success in all our 
interactions, and it embraces five interdependent dimensions of hfe. 
It begins with character and moves toward relationships, out of which 
flow agreements. It is nurtured in an environment where structure and 
systems are based on Win/Win. And it involves process; we cannot 
achieve Win/Win ends with Win/Lose or LoseA/Vin means. 

The following diagram shows how these five dimensions relate 
to each other. 



Win/Win\ / Win/Win\ /Win/Win 

Character \ /RelationshipsX / Agreements 



Supportive Systems (4) and Processes (5) 



Now let's consider each of the five dimensions in turn. 



HABIT 4 THINK win/win 217 

Character 

Character is the foundation of Win/Win, and everything else 
builds on that foundation. There are three character traits essential 
to the WinAVin paradigm. 

Integrity. We've already defined integrity as the value we place on 
ourselves. Habits 1, 2, and 3 help us develop and maintain 
integrity. As we clearly identify our values and proactively orga- 
nize and execute around those values on a daily basis, we develop 
self-awareness and independent will by making and keeping 
meaningful promises and commitments. 

There's no way to go for a Win in our own lives if we don't even 
know, in a deep sense, what constitutes a Win — what is, in fact, 
harmonious with our innermost values. And if we can't make and 
keep commitments to ourselves as well as to others, our commit- 
ments become meaningless. We know it; others know it. They 
sense duplicity and become guarded. There's no foundation of 
trust and Win/Win becomes an ineffective superficial technique. 
Integrity is the cornerstone in the foundation. 

Maturity. Maturity is the balance between courage and consideration. If 
a person can express his feelings and convictions with courage 
balanced with consideration for the feelings and convictions of 
another person, he is mature, particularly if the issue is very 
important to both parties. 

If you examine many of the psychological tests used for hiring, 
promoting, and training purposes, you will find that they are 
designed to evaluate this kind of maturity. Whether it's called the 
ego strength/empathy balance, the self confidence/respect for 
others balance, the concern for people/concern for tasks balance, 
"I'm okay, you're okay" in transactional analysis language, or 9.1, 
1.9, 5.5, 9.9, in management grid language — the quality sought for 
is the balance of what I call courage and consideration. 

Respect for this quality is deeply ingrained in the theory of 
human interaction, management, and leadership. It is a deep 
embodiment of the P/PC balance. While courage may focus on 
getting the golden egg, consideration deals with the long-term 
welfare of the other stakeholders. The basic task of leadership is to 
increase the standard of living and the quality of life for all 
stakeholders. 

Many people think in dichotomies, in either/or terms. They 



218 



THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



think if you're nice, you're not tough. But Win/Win is nice . . . and 
tough. It's twice as tough as Win/Lose. To go for Win/Win, you not 
only have to be nice, you have to be courageous. You not only have 
to be empathic, you have to be confident. You not only have to be 
considerate and sensitive, you have to be brave. To do that, to 
achieve that balance between courage and consideration, is the 
essence of real maturity and is fundamental to WinAVin. 

If I'm high on courage and low on consideration, how will I 
think? Win/Lose. I'll be strong and ego bound. I'll have the courage 
of my convictions, but I won't be very considerate of yours. 

To compensate for my lack of internal maturity and emotional 
strength, I might borrow strength from my position and power, or 
from my credentials, my seniority, my affiliations. 

If I'm high on consideration and low on courage, I'll think 
LoseA/Vin. I'll be so considerate of your convictions and desires that 
I won't have the courage to express and actualize my own. 



to 



o • 

H 



Q 

I— H 

an 
O 

u 



o 



Lose /Win 


Win/Win 


Lose /Lose 


Win /Lose 



COURAGE 



Low 



High 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/WIN 219 

High courage and consideration are both essential to Win/Win. It 
is the balance that is the mark of real maturity. If I have it, I can 
listen, I can empathically understand, but I can also courageously 
confront. 

Abundance Mentality. The third character trait essential to Win/Win 
is the Abundance Mentality, the paradigm that there is plenty out 
there for everybody. 

Most people are deeply scripted in what I call the Scarcity 
Mentality. They see life as having only so much, as though there 
were only one pie out there. And if someone were to get a big piece 
of the pie, it would mean less for everybody else. The Scarcity 
Mentality is the zero-sum paradigm of life. 

People with a Scarcity Mentality have a very difficult time 
sharing recognition and credit, power or profit — even with those 
who help in the production. They also have a very hard time being 
genuinely happy for the successes of other people — even, and 
sometimes especially, members of their own family or close friends 
and associates. It's almost as if something is being taken from them 
when someone else receives special recognition or windfall gain or 
has remarkable success or achievement. 

Although they might verbally express happiness for others' 
success, inwardly they are eating their hearts out. Their sense of 
worth comes from being compared, and someone else's success, to 
some degree, means their failure. Only so many people can be "A" 
students; only one person can be "number one." To "win" simply 
means to "beat." 

Often, people with a Scarcity Mentality harbor secret hopes that 
others might suffer misfortune — not terrible misfortune, but ac- 
ceptable misfortune that would keep them "in their place." They're 
always comparing, always competing. They give their energies to 
possessing things or other people in order to increase their sense of 
worth. 

They want other people to be the way they want them to be. 
They often want to clone them, and they surround themselves 
with "yes" people — people who won't challenge them, people 
who are weaker than they. 

It's difficult for people with a Scarcity Mentality to be members 
of a complementary team. They look on differences as signs of 
insubordination and disloyalty. 

The Abundance Mentality, on the other hand, flows out of a 



220 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

deep inner sense of personal worth and security. It is the paradigm 
that there is plenty out there and enough to spare for everybody. 
It results in sharing of prestige, of recognition, of profits, of 
decision making. It opens possibilities, options, alternatives, and 
creativity. 

The Abundance Mentality takes the personal joy, satisfaction, 
and fulfillment of Habits 1, 2, and 3 and turns it outward, 
appreciating the uniqueness, the inner direction, the proactive 
nature of others. It recognizes the unlimited possibilities for 
positive interactive growth and development, creating new Third 
Alternatives. 

Public Victory does not mean victory over other people. It means 
success in effective interaction that brings mutually beneficial 
results to everyone involved. Public Victory means working to- 
gether, communicating together, making things happen together 
that even the same people couldn't make happen by working 
independently. And Public Victory is an outgrowth of the Abun- 
dance Mentality paradigm. 

A character rich in integrity, maturity, and the Abundance 
Mentality has a genuineness that goes far beyond technique, or 
lack of it, in human interaction. 

One thing I have found particularly helpful to Win/Lose people 
in developing a WinAVin character is to associate with some model 
or mentor who really thinks WinAVin. When people are deeply 
scripted in Win/Lose or other philosophies and regularly associate 
with others who are likewise scripted, they don't have much 
opportunity to see and experience the Win/Win philosophy in 
action. So I recommend reading literature, such as the inspiring 
biography of Anwar Sadat, In Search of Identity, and seeing movies 
like Chariots of Fire or plays like Les Miserables that expose you to 
models of WinAVin. 

But remember: If we search deeply enough within ourselves — 
beyond the scripting, beyond the learned attitudes and behaviors — 
the real validation of Win/Win, as well as every other correct 
principle, is in our own lives. 

Relationships 

From the foundation of character, we build and maintain Win/ 
Win relationships. The trust, the Emotional Bank Account, is the 
essence of Win/Win. Without trust, the best we can do is compro- 
mise; without trust, we lack the credibility for open, mutual 
learning and communication and real creativity. 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/WIN 221 

But if our Emotional Bank Account is high, credibility is no 
longer an issue. Enough deposits have been made so that you 
know and I know that we deeply respect each other. We're focused 
on the issues, not on personalities or positions. 

Because we trust each other, we're open. We put our cards on 
the table. Even though we see things differently, I know that 
you're willing to listen with respect while I describe the young 
woman to you, and you know that I'll treat your description of the 
old woman with the same respect. We're both committed to try to 
understand each other's point of view deeply and to work together 
for the Third Alternative, the synergistic solution, that will be a 
better answer for both of us. 

A relationship where bank accounts are high and both parties 
are deeply committed to Win/Win is the ideal springboard for 
tremendous synergy (Habit 6). That relationship neither makes 
the issues any less real or important, nor eliminates the dif- 
ferences in perspective. But it does eliminate the negative energy 
normally focused on differences in personality and position and 
creates a positive, cooperative energy focused on thoroughly 
understanding the issues and resolving them in a mutually 
beneficial way. 

But what if that kind of relationship isn't there? What if you have 
to work out an agreement with someone who hasn't even heard of 
WinAVin and is deeply scripted in Win/Lose or some other 
philosophy? 

Dealing with Win/Lose is the real test of WinA^^in. Rarely is 
Win/Win easily achieved in any circumstance. Deep issues and 
fundamental differences have to be dealt with. But it is much easier 
when both parties are aware of and committed to it and where 
there is a high Emotional Bank Account in the relationship. 

When you're dealing with a person who is coming from a 
paradigm of Win/Lose, the relationship is still the key. The place to 
focus is on your Circle of Influence. You make deposits into the 
Emotional Bank Account through genuine courtesy, respect, and 
appreciation for that person and for the other point of view. You 
stay longer in the communication process. You listen more, you 
listen in greater depth. You express yourself with greater courage. 
You aren't reactive. You go deeper inside yourself for strength of 
character to be proactive. You keep hammering it out until the 
other person begins to realize that you genuinely want the reso- 
lution to be a real win for both of you. That very process is a 
tremendous deposit in the Emotional Bank Account. 



HI THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

And the stronger you are — the more genuine your character, the 
higher your level of proactivity, the more committed you really are 
to Win/Win — the more powerful your influence w^ill be with that 
other person. This is the real test of interpersonal leadership. It 
goes beyond transactional leadership into transformational leader- 
ship, transforming the individuals involved as well as the relation- 
ship. 

Because Win/Win is a principle people can validate in their own 
lives, you will be able to bring most people to a realization that they 
will win more of what they want by going for what you both want. 
But there will be a few who are so deeply embedded in the 
Win/Lose mentality that they just won't think Win/Win. So remem- 
ber that No Deal is always an option. Or you may occasionally 
choose to go for the low form of Win/Win — compromise. 

It's important to realize that not all decisions need to be 
Win/Win, even when the Emotional Bank Account is high. Again, 
the key is the relationship. If you and I worked together, for 
example, and you were to come to me and say, "Stephen, I know 
you won't like this decision. I don't have time to explain it to you, 
let alone get you involved. There's a good possibility you'll think 
it's wrong. But will you support it?" 

If you had a positive Emotional Bank Account with me, of course 
I'd support it. I'd hope you were right and I was wrong. I'd work 
to make your decision work. 

But if the Emotional Bank Account weren't there, and if I were 
reactive, I wouldn't really support it. I might say I would to your 
face, but behind your back I wouldn't be very enthusiastic. I 
wouldn't make the investment necessary to make it succeed. "It 
didn't work," I'd say. "So what do you want me to do now?" 

If I were overreactive, I might even torpedo your decision and do 
what I could to make sure others did too. Or I might become 
"maliciously obedient" and do exactly and only what you tell me to 
do, accepting no responsibility for results. 

During the five years I lived in Great Britain, I saw that country 
brought twice to its knees because the train conductors were 
maliciously obedient in following all the rules and procedures 
written on paper. 

An agreement means very little in letter without the character 
and relationship base to sustain it in spirit. So we need to approach 
Win/Win from a genuine desire to invest in the relationships that 
make it possible. 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/wIN ll'i 

Agreements 

From relationships flow the agreements that give definition and 
direction to Win/Win. They are sometimes called performance 
agreements or partnership agreements, shifting the paradigm of pro- 
ductive interaction from vertical to horizontal, from hovering 
supervision to self-supervision, from positioning to being partners 
in success. 

WinAVin agreements cover a wide scope of interdependent 
interaction. We discussed one important application when we 
talked about delegation in the "Green and Clean" story in Habit 3. 
The same five elements we listed there provide the structure for 
WinA/Vin agreements between employers and employees, between 
independent people working together on projects, between groups 
of people cooperatively focused on a common objective, between 
companies and suppliers — between any people who need to 
interact to accomplish. They create an effective way to clarify and 
manage expectations between people involved in any interdepen- 
dent endeavor. 

In the WinAVin agreement, the following five elements are made 
very explicit: 

Desired results (not methods) identify what is to be done and when. 
Guidelines specify the parameters (principles, policies, etc.) within 

which results are to be accomplished. 
Resources identify the human, financial, technical, or organizational 

support available to help accomplish the results. 
Accountability sets up the standards of performance and the time of 

evaluation. 
Consequences specify — good and bad, natural and logical — what does 

and will happen as a result of the evaluation. 

These five elements give Win/Win agreements a life of their own. 
A clear mutual understanding and agreement up front in these 
areas creates a standard against which people can measure their 
own success. 

Traditional authoritarian supervision is a Win/Lose paradigm. 
It's also the result of an overdrawn Emotional Bank Account. If you 
don't have trust or a common vision of desired results, you tend to 
hover over, check up on, and direct. Trust isn't there, so you feel 
as though you have to control people. 

But if the trust account is high, what is your method? Get out of 



224 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

their way. As long as you have an up-front Win/Win agreement 
and they know^ exactly w^hat is expected, your role is to be a source 
of help and to receive their accountability reports. 

It is much more ennobling to the human spirit to let people judge 
themselves than to judge them. And in a high trust culture, it's 
much more accurate. In many cases people know in their hearts 
how things are going much better than the records show. Discern- 
ment is often far more accurate than either observation or mea- 
surement. 

Win/Win Management Training 

Several years ago, I was indirectly involved in a consulting 
project with a very large banking institution that had scores of 
branches. They wanted us to evaluate and improve their manage- 
ment training program, which was supported by an annual budget 
of $750,000. The program involved selecting college graduates and 
putting them through twelve two-week assignments in various 
departments over a six-month period of time so that they could get 
a general sense of the industry. They spent two weeks in commer- 
cial loans, two weeks in industrial loans, two weeks in marketing, 
two weeks in operations, and so forth. At the end of the six-month 
period, they were assigned as assistant managers in the various 
branch banks. 

Our assignment was to evaluate the six-month formal training 
period. As we began, we discovered that the most difficult part of 
the assignment was to get a clear picture of the desired results. We 
asked the top executives the key hard question: "What should 
these people be able to do when they finish the program?" And the 
answers we got were vague and often contradictory. 

The training program dealt with methods, not results; so we 
suggested that they set up a pilot training program based on a 
different paradigm called "learner-controlled instruction." This 
was a Win/Win agreement that involved identifying specific objec- 
tives and criteria that would demonstrate their accomplishment 
and identifying the guidelines, resources, accountability, and 
consequences that would result when the objectives were met. The 
consequences in this case were promotion to assistant manager, 
where they would receive the on-the-job part of their training, and 
a significant increase in salary. 

We had to really press to get the objectives hammered out. 
"What is it you want them to understand about accounting? What 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/wIN 115 

about marketing? What about real estate loans?" And we went 
down the list. They finally came up with over one hundred 
objectives, which we simplified, reduced, and consolidated until 
we came down to 39 specific behavioral objectives with criteria 
attached to them. 

The trainees were highly motivated by both the opportunity and 
the increased salary to meet the criteria as soon as possible. There 
was a big win in it for them, and there was also a big win for the 
company because they would have assistant branch managers who 
met results-oriented criteria instead of just showing up for twelve 
different activity traps. 

So we explained the difference between learner-controlled in- 
struction and system-controlled instruction to the trainees. We 
basically said, "Here are the objectives and the criteria. Here are 
the resources, including learning from each other. So go to it. As 
soon as you meet the criteria, you will be promoted to assistant 
managers." 

They were finished in three-and-a-half weeks. Shifting the 
training paradigm had released unbelievable motivation and cre- 
ativity. 

As with many paradigm shifts, there was resistance. Almost all 
of the top executives simply wouldn't believe it. When they were 
shown the evidence that the criteria had been met, they basically 
said, "These trainees don't have the experience. They lack the 
seasoning necessary to give them the kind of judgment we want 
them to have as assistant branch managers." 

In talking with them later, we found that what many of them 
were really saying was, "We went through goat week; how come 
these guys don't have to?" But of course they couldn't put it that 
way. "They lack seasoning" was a much more acceptable expres- 
sion. 

In addition, for obvious reasons (including the $750,000 budget 
for a six-month program), the personnel department was upset. 

So we responded, "Fair enough. Let's develop some more 
objectives and attach criteria to them. But let's stay with the 
paradigm of learner-controlled instruction." We hammered out 
eight more objectives with very tough criteria in order to give the 
executives the assurance that the people were adequately prepared 
to be assistant branch managers and continue the on-the-job part 
of the training program. After participating in some of the sessions 
where these criteria were developed, several of the executives 



116 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

remarked that if the trainees could meet these tough criteria, they 
w^ould be better prepared than almost any who had gone through 
the six-month program. 

We had prepared the trainees to expect resistance. We took the 
additional objectives and criteria back to them and said, "Just as we 
expected, management wants you to accomplish some additional 
objectives with even tougher criteria than before. They have 
assured us this time that if you meet these criteria, they will make 
you assistant managers." 

They went to work in unbelievable ways. They went to the 
executives in departments such as accounting and basically said, 
"Sir, I am a member of this new pilot program called learner- 
controlled instruction, and it is my understanding that you partic- 
ipated in developing the objectives and the criteria. 

"I have six criteria to meet in this particular department. I was 
able to pass three of them off with skills I gained in college; I was 
able to get another one out of a book; I learned the fifth one from 
Tom, the fellow you trained last week. I only have one criterion left 
to meet, and I wonder if you or someone else in the department 
might be able to spend a few hours with me to show me how." So 
they spent half a day in a department instead of two weeks. 

These trainees cooperated with each other, brainstormed with 
each other, and they accomplished the additional objectives in a 
week and a half. The six-month program was reduced to five 
weeks, and the results were significantly increased. 

This kind of thinking can similarly affect every area of organiza- 
tional life if people have the courage to explore their paradigms 
and to concentrate on Win/Win. I am always amazed at the results 
that happen, both to individuals and to organizations, when 
responsible, proactive, self-directing individuals are turned loose 
on a task. 

Win/Win Performance Agreements 

Creating WinAVin performance agreements requires vital para- 
digm shifts. The focus is on results; not methods. Most of us tend 
to supervise methods. We use the gofer delegation discussed in 
Habit 3, the methods management I used with Sandra when I 
asked her to take pictures of our son as he was waterskiing. But 
Win/Win agreements focus on results, releasing tremendous indi- 
vidual human potential and creating greater synergy, building PC 
in the process instead of focusing exclusively on P. 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/wIN 117 

With WinA/Vin accountability, people evaluate themselves. The 
traditional evaluation games people play are awkward and emo- 
tionally exhausting. In Win/Win, people evaluate themselves, 
using the criteria that they themselves helped to create up front. 
And if you set it up correctly, people can do that. With a Win/Win 
delegation agreement, even a seven-year-old boy can tell for 
himself how well he's keeping the yard "green and clean." 

My best experiences in teaching university classes have come 
when I have created a WinAA/in shared understanding of the goal 
up front. "This is what we're trying to accomplish. Here are the 
basic requirements for an A, B, or C grade. My goal is to help every 
one of you get an A. Now you take what we've talked about and 
analyze it and come up with your own understanding of what you 
want to accomplish that is unique to you. Then let's get together 
and agree on the grade you want and what you plan to do to get 
it." 

Management philosopher and consultant Peter Drucker recom- 
mends the use of a "manager's letter" to capture the essence of 
performance agreements between managers and their employees. 
Following a deep and thorough discussion of expectations, guide- 
lines and resources to make sure they are in harmony with 
organizational goals, the employee writes a letter to the manager 
that summarizes the discussion and indicates when the next 
performance plan or review discussion will take place. 

Developing such a Win/Win performance agreement is the 
central activity of management. With an agreement in place, 
employees can manage themselves within the framework of that 
agreement. The manager then can serve like a pace car in a race. 
He can get things going and then get out of the way. His job from 
then on is to remove the oil spills. 

When a boss becomes the first assistant to each of his subordi- 
nates, he can greatly increase his span of control. Entire levels of 
administration and overhead can be eliminated. Instead of super- 
vising six or eight, such a manager can supervise twenty, thirty, 
fifty, or more. 

In WinAVin performance agreements, consequences become the 
natural or logical result of performance rather than a reward or 
punishment arbitrarily handed out by the person in charge. 

There are basically four kinds of consequences (rewards and 
penalties) that management or parents can control — financial, 
psychic, opportunity, and responsibility. Financial consequences 



228 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

include such things as income, stock options, allow^ances, or 
penalties. Psychic or psychological consequences include recogni- 
tion, approval, respect, credibility, or the loss of them. Unless 
people are in a survival mode, psychic compensation is often more 
motivating than financial compensation. Opportunity includes 
training, development, perks, and other benefits. Responsibility has 
to do v^^ith scope and authority, either of which can be enlarged or 
diminished. Win/Win agreements specify consequences in one or 
more of those areas and the people involved know it up front. So 
you don't play games. Everything is clear from the beginning. 

In addition to these logical, personal consequences, it is also 
important to clearly identify what the natural organizational con- 
sequences are. For example, what will happen if I'm late to work, 
if I refuse to cooperate with others, if I don't develop good 
WinA^^in performance agreements with my subordinates, if I don't 
hold them accountable for desired results, or if I don't promote 
their professional growth and career development? 

When my daughter turned 16, we set up a WinAVin agreement 
regarding use of the family car. We agreed that she would obey the 
laws of the land and that she would keep the car clean and 
properly maintained. We agreed that she would use the car only 
for responsible purposes and would serve as a cab driver for her 
mother and me within reason. And we also agreed that she would 
do all her other jobs cheerfully without being reminded. These 
were our wins. 

We also agreed that I would provide some resources — the car, gas, 
and insurance. And we agreed that she would meet weekly with me, 
usually on Sunday afternoon, to evaluate how she was doing based 
on our agreement. The consequences were clear. As long as she kept 
her part of the agreement, she could use the car. If she didn't keep 
it, she would lose the privilege until she decided to. 

This WinA^^in agreement set up clear expectations from the 
beginning on both our parts. It was a win for her — she got to use 
the car — and it was certainly a win for Sandra and me. Now she 
could handle her own transportation needs and even some of ours. 
We didn't have to worry about maintaining the car or keeping it 
clean. And we had a built-in accountability, which meant I didn't 
have to hover over her or manage her methods. Her integrity, her 
conscience, her power of discernment and our high Emotional 
Bank Account managed her infinitely better. We didn't have to get 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/WIN US 

emotionally strung out, trying to supervise her every move and 
coming up with punishments or rewards on the spot if she didn't 
do things the way we thought she should. We had a Win/Win 
agreement, and it liberated us all. 

WinAVin agreements are tremendously liberating. But as the 
product of isolated techniques, they won't hold up. Even if you set 
them up in the beginning, there is no way to maintain them 
without personal integrity and a relationship of trust. 

A true WinA/Vin agreement is the product of the paradigm, the 
character, and the relationships out of which it grows. In that 
context, it defines and directs the interdependent interaction for 
which it was created. 

Systems 

WinAVin can only survive in an organization when the systems 
support it. If you talk WinAVin but reward Win/Lose, you've got a 
losing program on your hands. 

You basically get what you reward. If you want to achieve the 
goals and reflect the values in your mission statement, then you 
need to align the reward system with these goals and values. If it 
isn't aligned systemically, you won't be walking your talk. You'll 
be in the situation of the manager I mentioned earlier who talked 
cooperation but practiced competition by creating a "Race to 
Bermuda" contest. 

I worked for several years with a very large real estate organi- 
zation in the Middle West. My first experience with this organiza- 
tion was at a large sales rally where over 800 sales associates 
gathered for the annual reward program. It was a psych-up 
cheerleading session, complete with high school bands and a great 
deal of frenzied screaming. 

Out of the 800 people there, around forty received awards for 
top performance, such as "Most Sales," "Greatest Volume," 
"Highest Earned Commissions," and "Most Listings." There was 
a lot of hoopla — excitement, cheering, applause — around the pre- 
sentation of these awards. There was no doubt that those forty 
people had won; but there was also the underlying awareness that 
760 people had losl. 

We immediately began educational and organizational develop- 
ment work to align the systems and structures of the organization 



230 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

toward the WinAVin paradigm. We involved people at a grass 
roots level to develop the kinds of systems that would motivate 
them. We also encouraged them to cooperate and synergize with 
each other so that as many as possible could achieve the desired 
results of their individually tailored performance agreements. 

At the next rally one year later, there were over 1,000 sales 
associates present, and about 800 of them received awards. There 
were a few individual winners based on comparisons, but the 
program primarily focused on people achieving self-selected per- 
formance objectives and on groups achieving team objectives. 
There was no need to bring in the high school bands to artificially 
contrive the fanfare, the cheerleading, and the psych up. There 
was tremendous natural interest and excitement because people 
could share in each other's happiness, and teams of sales associates 
could experience rewards together, including a vacation trip for the 
entire office. 

The remarkable thing was that almost all of the 800 who received 
the awards that year had produced as much per person in terms of 
volume and profit as the previous year's forty. The spirit of 
WinAVin had significantly increased the number of golden eggs 
and had fed the goose as well, releasing enormous human energy 
and talent. The resulting synergy was astounding to almost 
everyone involved. 

Competition has its place in the marketplace or against last 
year's performance — perhaps even against another office or indi- 
vidual where there is no particular interdependence, no need to 
cooperate. But cooperation in the workplace is as important to free 
enterprise as competition in the marketplace. The spirit of Win/ 
Win cannot survive in an environment of competition and contests. 

For Win/Win to work, the systems have to support it. The 
training system, the planning system, the communication system, 
the budgeting system, the information system, the compensation 
system — all have to be based on the principle of WinAVin. 

I did some consulting for another company that wanted training 
for their people in human relations. The underlying assumption 
was that the problem was the people. 

The president said, "Go into any store you want and see how 
they treat you. They're just order takers. They don't understand 
how to get close to the customers. They don't know the product. 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/wIN 231 

and they don't have the knowledge and the skill in the sales 
process necessary to create a marriage between the product and 
the need." 

So I went to the various stores. And he was right. But that still 
didn't answer the question in my mind: What caused the attitude? 

"Look, we're on top of the problem," the president said. "We 
have department heads out there setting a great example. We've 
told them their job is two-thirds selling and one-third management, 
and they're outselling everybody. We just want you to provide 
some training for the salespeople." 

Those words raised a red flag. "Let's get some more data," I 
said. 

He didn't like that. He "knew" what the problem was, and he 
wanted to get on with training. But I persisted, and within two 
days we uncovered the real problem. Because of the job definition 
and the compensation system, the managers were "creaming." 
They'd stand behind the cash register and cream all the business 
during the slow times. Half the time in retail is slow and the other 
half is frantic. So the managers would give all the dirty jobs — 
inventory control, stock work, and cleaning — to the salespeople. 
And they would stand behind the registers and cream. That's why 
the department heads were tops in sales. 

So we changed one system — the compensation system — and the 
problem was corrected overnight. We set up a system whereby the 
managers only made money when their salespeople made money. 
We overlapped the needs and goals of the managers with the 
needs and goals of the salespeople. And the need for human 
relations training suddenly disappeared. The key was developing 
a true Win/Win reward system. 

In another instance, I worked with a manager in a company that 
required formal performance evaluations. He was frustrated over 
the evaluation rating he had given a particular manager. "He 
deserved a three," he said, "but I had to give him a one" (which 
meant superior, promotable). 

"What did you give him a one for?" I asked. 

"He gets the numbers," was his reply. 

"So why do you think he deserves a three?" 

"It's the way he gets them. He neglects people; he runs over 
them. He's a troublemaker." 

'Tt sounds like he's totally focused on P — on production. And 



232 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

that's what he's being rewarded for. But what would happen if you 
talked with him about the problem, if you helped him understand 
the importance of PC?" 

He said he had done so, with no effect. 

"Then what if you set up a Win/Win contract with him where 
you both agreed that two-thirds of his compensation would come 
from P — from the numbers — and the other one-third would come 
from PC — how other people perceive him, what kind of leader, 
people builder, team builder he is?" 

"Now that would get his attention," he replied. 

So often the problem is in the system, not in the people. If you 
put good people in bad systems, you get bad results. You have to 
water the flowers you want to grow. 

As people really learn to think Win/Win, they can set up the 
systems to create and reinforce it. They can transform unnecessar- 
ily competitive situations to cooperative ones and can powerfully 
impact their effectiveness by building both P and PC. 

In business, executives can align their systems to create teams of 
highly productive people working together to compete against 
external standards of performance. In education, teachers can set 
up grading systems based on an individual's performance in the 
context of agreed upon criteria and can encourage students to 
cooperate in productive ways to help each other learn and achieve. 
In families, parents can shift the focus from competition with each 
other to cooperation. In activities such as bowling, for example, 
they can keep a family score and try to beat a previous one. They 
can set up home responsibilities with WinAVin agreements that 
eliminate constant nagging and enable parents to do the things 
only they can do. 

A friend once shared with me a cartoon he'd seen of two 
children talking to each other. "If mommy doesn't get us up soon," 
one was saying, "we're going to be late for school." These words 
brought forcibly to his attention the nature of the problems created 
when families are not organized on a responsible Win/Win basis. 

WinAVin puts the responsibility on the individual for accom- 
plishing specified results within clear guidelines and available 
resources. It makes a person accountable to perform and evaluate 
the results and provides consequences as a natural result of 
performance. And Win/Win systems create the environment which 
supports and reinforces the Win/Win performance agreements. 



HABIT 4 THINK WIN/wIN 233 

Processes 

There's no way to achieve WinAVin ends with Win/Lose or 
Lose/Win means. You can't say, "You're going to think Win/Win, 
whether you like it or not." So the question becomes how to arrive 
at a Win/Win solution. 

Roger Fisher and William Ury, two Harvard law professors, have 
done some outstanding work in what they call the "principled" 
approach versus the "positional" approach to bargaining in their 
tremendously useful and insightful book. Getting to Yes. Although 
the words WinAVin are not used, the spirit and underlying 
philosophy of the book are in harmony with the Win/Win ap- 
proach. 

They suggest that the essence of principled negotiation is to 
separate the person from the problem, to focus on interests and not 
on positions, to invent options for mutual gain, and to insist on 
objective criteria — some external standard or principle that both 
parties can buy into. 

In my own work with various people and organizations seeking 
WinAVin solutions, I suggest that they become involved in the 
following four-step process: 

First, see the problem from the other point of view. Really seek to 
understand and to give expression to the needs and concerns of 
the other party as well as or better than they can themselves. 

Second, identify the key issues and concerns (not positions) in- 
volved. 

Third, determine what results would constitute a fully acceptable 
solution. 

And fourth, identify possible new options to achieve those results. 

Habits 5 and 6 deal directly with two of the elements of this 
process, and we will go into those in depth in the next two 
chapters. 

But at this juncture, let me point out the highly interrelated 
nature of the process of WinAVin with the essence of WinAVin 
itself. You can only achieve WinAVin solutions with WinAVin 
processes — the end and the means are the same. 

WinAVin is not a personality technique. It's a total paradigm of 
human interaction. It comes from a character of integrity, maturity, 
and the Abundance Mentality. It grows out of high-trust relation- 
ships. It is embodied in agreements that effectively clarify and 



234 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

manage expectations as well as accomplishment. It thrives in 
supportive systems. And it is achieved through the process we are 
now prepared to more fully examine in Habits 5 and 6. 

Application Suggestions: 

1. Think about an upcoming interaction wherein you will be at- 
tempting to reach an agreement or negotiate a solution. Commit 
to maintain a balance between courage and consideration. 

2. Make a list of obstacles that keep you from applying the Win/Win 
paradigm more frequently. Determine what could be done within 
your Circle of Influence to eliminate some of those obstacles. 

3. Select a specific relationship where you would like to develop a 
Win/Win agreement. Try to put yourself in the other person's 
place, and write down explicitly how you think that person sees 
the solution. Then list, from your own perspective, what results 
would constitute a Win for you. Approach the other person and 
ask if he or she would be willing to communicate until you reach 
a point of agreement and mutually beneficial solution. 

4. Identify three key relationships in your life. Give some indication 
of what you feel the balance is in each of the Emotional Bank 
Accounts. Write down some specific ways you could make 
deposits in each account. 

5. Deeply consider your own scripting. Is it Win/Lose? How does 
that scripting affect your interactions with other people? Can you 
identify the main source of that script? Determine whether or not 
those scripts serve well in your current reality. 

6. Try to identify a model of WinAVin thinking who, even in hard 
situations, really seeks mutual benefit. Determine now to more 
closely watch and learn from this person's example. 



Habit 5 
Seek First to Understand, 
Then to Be Understood 

Principles of Empathic 
Communication 



Interdependence 



Seek First to Understand 

. . . Then to be 

Understood 



^ 

s 




Dependence 



235 



236 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



The heart has its reasons which reason knows not of. 

Pascal 



SUPPOSE you've BEEN HAVING TROUBLE WITH YOUR EYES and you decide to 
go to an optometrist for help. After briefly listening to your 
complaint, he takes off his glasses and hands them to you. 

"Put these on," he says. "I've v^orn this pair of glasses for ten 
years now and they've really helped me. I have an extra pair at 
home; you can wear these." 

So you put them on, but it only makes the problem worse. 

"This is terrible!" you exclaim. "I can't see a thing!" 

"Well, what's wrong?" he asks. "They work great for me. Try 
harder." 

"I am trying," you insist. "Everything is a blur." 

"Well, what's the matter with you? Think positively." 

"Okay. I positively can't see a thing." 

"Boy, are you ungrateful!" he chides. "And after all I've done to 
help you!" 

What are the chances you'd go back to that optometrist the next 
time you needed help? Not very good, I would imagine. You don't 
have much confidence in someone who doesn't diagnose before he 
or she prescribes. 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 2?>7 

But how often do we diagnose before we prescribe in commu- 
nication? 

"Come on, honey, tell me how you feel. I know it's hard, but I'll 
try to understand." 

"Oh, I don't know, Mom. You'd think it was stupid." 

"Of course 1 wouldn't! You can tell me. Honey, no one cares for 
you as much as I do. I'm only interested in your welfare. What's 
making you so unhappy?" 

"Oh, I don't know." 

"Come on, honey. What is it?" 

"Well, to tell you the truth, I just don't like school anymore." 

"What?" you respond incredulously. "What do you mean you 
don't like school? And after all the sacrifices we've made for your 
education! Education is the foundation of your future. If you'd 
apply yourself like your older sister does, you'd do better and then 
you'd like school. Time and time again, we've told you to settle 
down. You've got the ability, but you just don't apply yourself. Try 
harder. Get a positive attitude about it." 

Pause. 

"Now go ahead. Tell me how you feel." 

We have such a tendency to rush in, to fix things up with good 
advice. But we often fail to take the time to diagnose, to really, 
deeply understand the problem first. 

If I were to summarize in one sentence the single most important 
principle I have learned in the field of interpersonal relations, it 
would be this: Seek first to understand, then to be understood. This 
principle is the key to effective interpersonal communication. 

Character and Communication 

Right now, you're reading a book I've written. Reading and 
writing are both forms of communication. So are speaking and 
listening. In fact, those are the four basic types of communication. 
And think of all the hours you spend doing at least one of those 
four things. The ability to do them well is absolutely critical to your 
effectiveness. 

Communication is the most important skill in life. We spend 
most of our waking hours communicating. But consider this: 
You've spent years learning how to read and write, years learning 



238 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

how to speak. But what about listening? What training or education 
have you had that enables you to listen so that you really, deeply 
understand another human being from that individual's own 
frame of reference? 

Comparatively few people have had any training in listening at 
all. And, for the most part, their training has been in the Person- 
ality Ethic of technique, truncated from the character base and the 
relationship base absolutely vital to authentic understanding of 
another person. 

If you want to interact effectively with me, to influence me — 
your spouse, your child, your neighbor, your boss, your coworker, 
your friend — you first need to understand me. And you can't do 
that with technique alone. If I sense you're using some technique, 
I sense duplicity, manipulation. I wonder why you're doing it, 
what your motives are. And I don't feel safe enough to open 
myself up to you. 

The real key to your influence with me is your example, your 
actual conduct. Your example flows naturally out of your character, 
or the kind of person you truly are — not what others say you are or 
what you may want me to think you are. It is evident in how I 
actually experience you. 

Your character is constantly radiating, communicating. From it, 
in the long run, I come to instinctively trust or distrust you and 
your efforts with me. 

If your life runs hot and cold, if you're both caustic and kind, 
and, above all, if your private performance doesn't square with 
your public performance, it's very hard for me to open up with 
you. Then, as much as I may want and even need to receive your 
love and influence, I don't feel safe enough to expose my opinions 
and experiences and my tender feehngs. Who knows what will 
happen? 

But unless I open up with you, unless you understand me and 
my unique situation and feehngs, you won't know how to advise 
or counsel me. What you say is good and fine, but it doesn't quite 
pertain to me. 

You may say you care about and appreciate me. I desperately 
want to believe that. But how can you appreciate me when you 
don't even understand me? All I have are your words, and I can't 
trust words. 

I'm too angry and defensive — perhaps too guilty and afraid — to 
be influenced, even though inside I know I need what you could 
tell me. 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 239 

Unless you're influenced by my uniqueness, I'm not going to be 
influenced by your advice. So if you want to be really effective in 
the habit of interpersonal communication, you cannot do it with 
technique alone. You have to build the skills of empathic listening 
on a base of character that inspires openness and trust. And you 
have to build the Emotional Bank Accounts that create a commerce 
between hearts. 



Empathic Listening 

"Seek first to understand" involves a very deep shift in para- 
digm. We typically seek first to be understood. Most people do not 
listen with the intent to understand; they listen with the intent to 
reply. They're either speaking or preparing to speak. They're 
filtering everything through their own paradigms, reading their 
autobiography into other people's lives. 

"Oh, I know exactly how you feel!" 

"I went through the very same thing. Let me tell you about my 
experience." 

They're constantly projecting their own home movies onto other 
people's behavior. They prescribe their own glasses for everyone 
with whom they interact. 

If they have a problem with someone — a son, a daughter, a 
spouse, an employee — their attitude is, "That person just doesn't 
understand." 

A father once told me, "I can't understand my kid. He just won't 
listen to me at all." 

"Let me restate what you just said," 1 replied. "You don't 
understand your son because he won't listen to you?" 

"That's right," he replied. 

"Let me try again," I said. "You don't understand your son 
because he won't listen to you?" 

"That's what I said," he impatiently replied. 

"I thought that to understand another person, you needed to 
listen to him," I suggested. 

"Oh!" he said. There was a long pause. "Oh!" he said again, as 
the light began to dawn. "Oh, yeah! But I do understand him. I 
know what he's going through. I went through the same thing 
myself. I guess what I don't understand is why he won't listen to 
me." 

This man didn't have the vaguest idea of what was really going 



240 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

on inside his boy's head. He looked into his own head and thought 
he saw the world, including his boy. 

That's the case with so many of us. We're filled with our own 
rightness, our own autobiography. We want to be understood. 
Our conversations become collective monologues, and we never 
really understand what's going on inside another human being. 

When another person speaks, we're usually "listening" at one of 
four levels. We may be ignoring another person, not really listening 
at all. We may practice pretending. "Yeah. Uh-huh. Right." We may 
practice selective listening, hearing only certain parts of the con- 
versation. We often do this when we're listening to the constant 
chatter of a preschool child. Or we may even practice attentive 
listening, paying attention and focusing energy on the words that 
are being said. But very few of us ever practice the fifth level, the 
highest form of listening, empathic listening. 

When I say empathic listening, I am not referring to the 
techniques of "active" listening or "reflective" listening, which 
basically involve mimicking what another person says. That kind 
of listening is skill-based, truncated from character and relation- 
ships, and often insults those "listened" to in such a way. It is also 
essentially autobiographical. If you practice those techniques, you 
may not project your autobiography in the actual interaction, but 
your motive in listening is autobiographical. You listen with 
reflective skills, but you listen with intent to reply, to control, to 
manipulate. 

When I say empathic listening, I mean listening with intent to 
understand. I mean seeking first to understand, to really understand. 
It's an entirely different paradigm. 

Empathic (from empathy) listening gets inside another person's 
frame of reference. You look out through it, you see the world the 
way they see the world, you understand their paradigm, you 
understand how they feel. 

Empathy is not sympathy. Sympathy is a form of agreement, a 
form of judgment. And it is sometimes the more appropriate 
emotion and response. But people often feed on sympathy. It 
makes them dependent. The essence of empathic listening is not 
that you agree with someone; it's that you fully, deeply, under- 
stand that person, emotionally as well as intellectually. 

Empathic listening involves much more than registering, reflect- 
ing, or even understanding the words that are said. Communica- 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 241 

tions experts estimate, in fact, that only 10 percent of our 
communication is represented by the words we say. Another 30 
percent is represented by our sounds, and 60 percent by our body 
language. In empathic listening, you listen with your ears, but you 
also, and more importantly, listen with your eyes and with your 
heart. You listen for feeling, for meaning. You listen for behavior. 
You use your right brain as well as your left. You sense, you intuit, 
you feel. 

Empathic listening is so powerful because it gives you accurate 
data to work with. Instead of projecting your own autobiography 
and assuming thoughts, feelings, motives and interpretation, 
you're dealing with the reality inside another person's head and 
heart. You're listening to understand. You're focused on receiving 
the deep communication of another human soul. 

In addition, empathic listening is the key to making deposits in 
Emotional Bank Accounts, because nothing you do is a deposit 
unless the other person perceives it as such. You can work your 
fingers to the bone to make a deposit, only to have it turn into a 
withdrawal when a person regards your efforts as manipulative, 
self-serving, intimidating, or condescending because you don't 
understand what really matters to him. 

Empathic listening is, in and of itself, a tremendous deposit in 
the Emotional Bank Account. It's deeply therapeutic and healing 
because it gives a person "psychological air." 

If all the air were suddenly sucked out of the room you're in right 
now, what would happen to your interest in this book? You 
wouldn't care about the book; you wouldn't care about anything 
except getting air. Survival would be your only motivation. 

But now that you have air, it doesn't motivate you. This is one of 
the greatest insights in the field of human motivation: Satisfied 
needs do not motivate. It's only the unsatisfied need that motivates. 
Next to physical survival, the greatest need of a human being is 
psychological survival — to be understood, to be affirmed, to be 
validated, to be appreciated. 

When you listen with empathy to another person, you give that 
person psychological air. And after that vital need is met, you can 
then focus on influencing or problem solving. 

This need for psychological air impacts communication in every 
area of life. 



242 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

I taught this concept at a seminar in Chicago one time, and I 
instructed the participants to practice empathic listening during 
the evening. The next morning, a man came up to me almost 
bursting with new^s. 

"Let me tell you what happened last night," he said. "I was 
trying to close a big commercial real estate deal while I was here in 
Chicago. I met with the principals, their attorneys, and another 
real estate agent who had just been brought in with an alternative 
proposal. 

"It looked as if I were going to lose the deal. I had been working 
on this deal for over six months and, in a very real sense, all my 
eggs were in this one basket. All of them. I panicked. I did 
everything I could — I pulled out all the stops — I used every sales 
technique I could. The final stop was to say, 'Could we delay this 
decision just a little longer?' But the momentum was so strong and 
they were so disgusted by having this thing go on so long, it was 
obvious they were going to close. 

"So I said to myself, 'Well, why not try it? Why not practice what 
I learned today and seek first to understand, then to be under- 
stood? I've got nothing to lose.' 

"I just said to the man, 'Let me see if I really understand what 
your position is and what your concerns about my recommenda- 
tions really are. When you feel I understand them, then we'll see 
whether my proposal has any relevance or not.' 

"I really tried to put myself in his shoes. I tried to verbalize his 
needs and concerns, and he began to open up. 

"The more I sensed and expressed the things he was worried 
about, the results he anticipated, the more he opened up. 

"Finally, in the middle of our conversation, he stood up, walked 
over to the phone, and dialed his wife. Putting his hand over the 
mouthpiece, he said, 'You've got the deal.' 

"I was totally dumbfounded," he told me. "I still am this 
morning." 

He had made a huge deposit in the Emotional Bank Account by 
giving the man psychological air. When it comes right down to it, 
other things being relatively equal, the human dynamic is more 
important than the technical dimensions of the deal. 

Seeking first to understand, diagnosing before you prescribe, is 
hard. It's so much easier in the short run to hand someone a pair 
of glasses that have fit you so well these many years. 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 243 

But in the long run, it severely depletes both P and PC. You can't 
achieve maximum interdependent production from an inaccurate 
understanding of where other people are coming from. And you 
can't have interpersonal PC — high Emotional Bank Accounts — if 
the people you relate with don't really feel understood. 

Empathic listening is also risky. It takes a great deal of security to 
go into a deep listening experience because you open yourself up 
to be influenced. You become vulnerable. It's a paradox, in a sense, 
because in order to have influence, you have to be influenced. That 
means you have to really understand. 

That's why Habits 1, 2, and 3 are so foundational. They give you 
the changeless inner core, the principle center, from which you can 
handle the more outward vulnerability with peace and strength. 

Diagnose Before You Prescribe 

Although it's risky and hard, seek first to understand, or 
diagnose before you prescribe, is a correct principle manifest in 
many areas of life. It's the mark of all true professionals. It's critical 
for the optometrist, it's critical for the physician. You wouldn't 
have any confidence in a doctor's prescription unless you had 
confidence in the diagnosis. 

When our daughter Jenny was only two months old, she was 
sick one Saturday, the day of a football game in our community 
that dominated the consciousness of almost everyone. It was an 
important game — some 60,000 people were there. Sandra and I 
would like to have gone, but we didn't want to leave little Jenny. 
Her vomihng and diarrhea had us concerned. 

The doctor was at that game. He wasn't our personal physician, 
but he was the one on call. When Jenny's situation got worse, we 
decided we needed some medical advice. 

Sandra dialed the stadium and had him paged. It was right at a 
critical time in the game, and she could sense an officious tone in 
his voice. "Yes?" he said briskly. "What is it?" 

"This is Mrs. Covey, Doctor, and we're concerned about our 
daughter, Jenny." 

"What's the situation?" he asked. 

Sandra described the symptoms, and he said, "Okav. I'll call in 
a prescription. Which is your pharmacy?" 

When she hung up, Sandra felt that in her rush she hadn't really 



244 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

given him full data, but that what she had told him was adequate. 

"Do you think he realizes that Jenny is just a newborn?" I asked 
her. 

"I'm sure he does," Sandra replied. 

"But he's not our doctor. He's never even treated her." 

"Well, I'm pretty sure he knows." 

"Are you willing to give her the medicine unless you're abso- 
lutely sure he knows?" 

Sandra was silent. "What are we going to do?" she finally said. 

"Call him back," I said. 

"You call him back," Sandra replied. 

So I did. He was paged out of the game once again. "Doctor," I 
said, "when you called in that prescription, did you realize that 
Jenny is just two months old?" 

"No!" he exclaimed. "I didn't realize that. It's good you called 
me back. I'll change the prescription immediately." 

If you don't have confidence in the diagnosis, you won't have 
confidence in the prescription. 

This principle is also true in sales. An effective sales person first 
seeks to understand the needs, the concerns, the situation of the 
customer. The amateur salesman sells products; the professional 
sells solutions to needs and problems. It's a totally different 
approach. The professional learns how to diagnose, how to under- 
stand. He also learns how to relate people's needs to his products 
and services. And, he has to have the integrity to say, "My product 
or service will not meet that need" if it will not. 

Diagnosing before you prescribe is also fundamental to law. The 
professional lawyer first gathers the facts to understand the 
situation, to understand the laws and precedents, before preparing 
a case. A good lawyer almost writes the opposing attorney's case 
before he writes his own. 

It's also true in product design. Can you imagine someone in a 
company saying, "This consumer research stuff is for the birds. 
Let's design products." In other words, forget understanding the 
consumer's buying habits and motives — just design products. It 
would never work. 

A good engineer will understand the forces, the stresses at work, 
before designing the bridge. A good teacher will assess the class 
before teaching. A good student will understand before he applies. 
A good parent will understand before evaluating or judging. The 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 245 

key to good judgment is understanding. By judging first, a person 
will never fully understand. 

Seek first to understand is a correct principle evident in all areas 
of life. It's a generic, common denominator principle, but it has its 
greatest power in the area of interpersonal relations. 

Four Autobiographical Responses 

Because we listen autobiographically, we tend to respond in one 
of four ways. We evaluate — we either agree or disagree; we probe — 
we ask questions from our own frame of reference; we advise — we 
give counsel based on our own experience; or we interpret — we try 
to figure people out, to explain their motives, their behavior, based 
on our own motives and behavior. 

These responses come naturally to us. We are deeply scripted in 
them; we live around models of them all the time. But how do they 
affect our ability to really understand? 

If I'm trying to communicate with my son, can he feel free to 
open himself up to me when I evaluate everything he says before 
he really explains it? Am I giving him psychological air? 

And how does he feel when I probe? Probing is playing twenty 
questions. It's autobiographical, it controls, and it invades. It's also 
logical, and the language of logic is different from the language of 
sentiment and emotion. You can play twenty questions all day and 
not find out what's important to someone. Constant probing is one 
of the main reasons parents do not get close to their children. 

"How's it going, son?" 

"Fine." 

"Well, what's been happening lately?" 

"Nothing." 

"So what's exciting in school?" 

"Not much." 

"And what are your plans for the weekend?" 

"I don't know." 

You can't get him off the phone talking with his friends, but all 
he gives you is one- and two-word answers. Your house is a motel 
where he eats and sleeps, but he never shares, never opens up. 

And when you think about it, honestly, why should he, if every 
time he does open up his soft underbelly, you elephant stomp it 
with autobiographical advice and "I told you so's." 

We are so deeply scripted in these responses that we don't even 



246 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

realize w^hen we use them. I have taught this concept to 
thousands of people in seminars across the country, and it never 
fails to shock them deeply as we role-play empathic listening 
situations and they finally begin to listen to their own typical 
responses. But as they begin to see how they normally respond 
and learn how to listen with empathy, they can see the dramatic 
results in communication. To many, seek first to understand 
becomes the most exciting, the most immediately applicable, of all 
the Seven Habits. 

Let's take a look at what well might be a typical communication 
between a father and his teenage son. Look at the father's words in 
terms of the four different responses we have just described. 

"Boy, Dad, I've had it! School is for the birds!" 

"What's the matter. Son?" (probing). 

"It's totally impractical. I don't get a thing out of it." 

"Well, you just can't see the benefits yet. Son. I felt the same 
way when I was your age. I remember thinking what a waste some 
of the classes were. But those classes turned out to be the most 
helpful to me later on. Just hang in there. Give it some time" 
(advising). 

"I've given it ten years of my life! Can you tell me what good 'x 
plus y' is going to be to me as an auto mechanic?" 

"An auto mechanic? You've got to be kidding" (evaluating). 

"No, I'm not. Look at Joe. He's quit school. He's working on 
cars. And he's making lots of money. Now that's practical." 

"It may look that way now. But several years down the road, 
Joe's going to wish he'd stayed in school. You don't want to be an 
auto mechanic. You need an education to prepare you for some- 
thing better than that" (advising). 

"I don't know. Joe's got a pretty good set up." 

"Look, Son, have you really tried?" (probing, evaluating). 

"I've been in high school two years now. Sure I've tried. It's just 
a waste." 

"That's a highly respected school. Son. Give them a little credit" 
(advising, evaluating). 

"Well, the other guys feel the same way I do." 

"Do you realize how many sacrifices your mother and I have 
made to get you where you are? You can't quit when you've come 
this far" (evaluating). 

"I know you've sacrificed. Dad. But it's just not worth it." 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 2A7 

"Look, maybe if you spent more time doing your homework and 
less time in front of TV . . ." (advising, evaluating). 

"Look, Dad. It's just no good. Oh . . . never mind! I don't want 
to talk about this anyway." 

Obviously, his father was well intended. Obviously, he wanted 
to help. But did he even begin to really understand? 

Let's look more carefully at the son — not just his words, but his 
thoughts and feelings (expressed parenthetically below) and the 
possible effect of some of his dad's autobiographical responses. 

"Boy, Dad, I've had it! School is for the birds!" (/ want to talk with 
you, to get your attention.) 

"What's the matter. Son?" {You're interested! Good!) 

"It's totally impractical. I don't get a thing out of it." {I've got a 
problem with school, and I feel just terrible.) 

"Well, you just can't see the benefits yet. Son. I felt the same 
way when I was your age." {Oh, no! Here comes Chapter three of Dad's 
autobiography. This isn't what I want to talk about. I don't really care how 
many miles he had to trudge through the snow to school without any boots. 
I want to get to the problem.) "I remember thinking what a waste 
some of the classes were. But those classes turned out to be the 
most helpful to me later on. Just hang in there. Give it some time." 
{Time won't solve my problem. I wish I could tell you. I wish I could just 
spit it out.) 

"I've given it ten years of my life! Can you tell me what good 'x 
plus y' is going to do me as an auto mechanic?" 

"An auto mechanic? You've got to be kidding." {He wouldn't like 
me if I were an auto mechanic. He wouldn't like me if I didn't finish school. 
I have to justify what I said.) 

"No, I'm not. Look at Joe. He's quit school. He's working on 
cars. And he's making lots of money. Now that's practical." 

"It may look that way now. But several years down the road, 
Joe's going to wish he'd stayed in school." {Oh, boy! Here comes 
lecture number sixteen on the value of an education.) "You don't want 
to be an auto mechanic." {How do you know that. Dad? Do you really 
have any idea what I want?) "You need an education to prepare you 
for something better than that." 

"I don't know. Joe's got a pretty good set up." {He's not a failure. 
He didn't finish school and he's not a failure.) 

"Look, Son, have you really tried?" (We're beating around the bush. 



248 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Dad. If you'd just listen, I really need to talk to you about something 
important.) 

"I've been in high school two years now^. Sure I've tried. It's just 
a waste." 

"That's a highly respected school. Son. Give them a little credit." 
{Oh, great. Now we're talking credibility. I wish I could talk about what 
I want to talk about.) 

"Well, the other guys feel the same way I do." (/ have some 
credibility, too. I'm not a moron.) 

"Do you realize how many sacrifices your mother and I have 
made to get you where you are?" {Uh-oh, here comes the guilt trip. 
Maybe lama moron. The school's great. Mom and Dad are great, and I'm 
a moron.) "You can't quit when you've come this far." 

"I know you've sacrificed. Dad. But it's just not worth it." {You 
just don't understand.) 

"Look, maybe if you spent more time doing your homework and 
less time in front of TV. ..." {That's not the problem. Dad! That's not 
it at all! Til never be able to tell you. I was dumb to try.) 

"Look, Dad. It's just no good. Oh . . . never mind! I don't want 
to talk about this anyway." 

Can you see how limited we are when we try to understand 
another person on the basis of words alone, especially when 
we're looking at that person through our own glasses? Can you 
see how limiting our autobiographical responses are to a person 
who is genuinely trying to get us to understand his auto- 
biography? 

You will never be able to truly step inside another person, to see 
the world as he sees it, until you develop the pure desire, the 
strength of personal character, and the positive Emotional Bank 
Account, as well as the empathic listening skills to do it. 

The skills, the tip of the iceberg of empathic listening, involve 
four developmental stages. 

The first and least effective is to mimic content. This is the skill 
taught in "active" or "reflective" listening. Without the character 
and relationship base, it is often insulting to people and causes 
them to close up. It is, however, a first stage skill because it at least 
causes you to listen to what's being said. 

Mimicking content is easy. You just listen to the words that come 
out of someone's mouth and you repeat them. You're hardly even 
using your brain at all. 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 249 

"Boy, Dad, I've had it! School is for the birds!" 

"You've had it. You think school is for the birds." 

You have essentially repeated back the content of what was 
being said. You haven't evaluated or probed or advised or inter- 
preted. You've at least showed you're paying attention to his 
words. But to understand, you want to do more. 

The second stage of emphatic listening is to rephrase the content. 
It's a little more effective, but it's still limited to the verbal 
communication . 

"Boy, Dad, I've had it! School is for the birds!" 

"You don't want to go to school anymore." 

This time, you've put his meaning into your own words. Now 
you're thinking about what he said, mostly with the left side, the 
reasoning, logical side of the brain. 

The third stage brings your right brain into operation. You reflect 
feeling. 

"Boy, Dad, I've had it! School is for the birds!" 

"You're feeling really frustrated." 

Now you're not paying as much attention to what he's saying as 
you are to the way he feels about what he's saying. The fourth 
stage includes both the second and the third. You rephrase the 
content and reflect the feeling. 

"Boy, Dad, I've had it! School is for the birds!" 

"You're really frustrated about school." 

Frustration is the feeling; school is the content. You're using 
both sides of your brain to understand both sides of his commu- 
nication. 

Now, what happens when you use fourth stage empathic 
listening skills is really incredible. As you authentically seek to 
understand, as you rephrase content and reflect feeling, you give 
him psychological air. You also help him work through his own 
thoughts and feelings. As he grows in his confidence of your 
sincere desire to really listen and understand, the barrier between 
what's going on inside him and what's actually being communi- 
cated to you disappears. It opens a soul to soul flow. He's not 
thinking and feeling one thing and communicating another. He 
begins to trust you with his innermost tender feelings and 
thoughts. 

"Boy, Dad, I've had it! School is for the birds!" (/ want to talk with 
you, to get your attention.) 



250 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

"You're really frustrated about school." {That's right! That's how I 
feel) 

"I sure am. It's totally impractical. I'm not getting a thing out of 
it." 

"You feel like school's not doing you any good." {Let me think — is 
that what I mean?) 

"Well, yeah. I'm just not learning anything that's going to help 
me. I mean, look at Joe. He's dropped out of school and he's 
working on cars. He's making money. Now that's practical." 

"You feel that Joe really has the right idea." {Well. . . .) 

"Well, I guess he does in a way. He's really making money 
now. But in a few years, I bet he'll probably be ticked off at him- 
self." 

"You think Joe's going to feel he made the wrong decision." 

"He's got to. Just look at what he's giving up. I mean, if you 
don't have an education, you just can't make it in this world." 

"Education is really important." 

"Oh, yeah! I mean, if you don't have a diploma, if you can't get 
jobs or go to college, what are you going to do? You've just got to 
get an education." 

"It's important to your future." 

"It is. And . . . you know what? I'm really worried. Listen, you 
won't tell Mom, will you?" 

"You don't want your mother to find out." 

"Well, not really. Oh, I guess you can tell her. She'll probably 
find out anyway. Look, I took this test today, this reading test. 
And, Dad, they said I'm reading on a fourth-grade level. Fourth 
grade! And I'm a junior in high school!" 

What a difference real understanding can make! All the well- 
meaning advice in the world won't amount to a hill of beans if 
we're not even addressing the real problem. And we'll never get to 
the problem if we're so caught up in our own autobiography, our 
own paradigms, that we don't take off our glasses long enough to 
see the world from another point of view. 

"I'm going to flunk. Dad. I guess I figure if I'm going to flunk, I 
might as well quit. But I don't want to quit." 

"You feel torn. You're in the middle of a dilemma." 
"What do you think I should do. Dad?" 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 251 

By seeking first to understand, this father has just turned a 
transactional opportunity into a transformational opportunity. 
Instead of interacting on a surface, get-the-job-done level of 
communication, he has created a situation in which he can now 
have transforming impact, not only on his son but also on the 
relationship. By setting aside his own autobiography and really 
seeking to understand, he has made a tremendous deposit in the 
Emotional Bank Account and has empowered his son to open, 
layer upon layer, and to get to the real issue. 

Now father and son are on the same side of the table looking at 
the problem, instead of on opposite sides looking across at each 
other. The son is opening his father's autobiography and asking for 
advice. 

Even as the father begins to counsel, however, he needs to be 
sensitive to his son's communication. As long as the response is 
logical, the father can effectively ask questions and give counsel. 
But the moment the response becomes emotional, he needs to go 
back to empathic listening. 

"Well, I can see some things you might want to consider." 

"Like what. Dad?" 

"Like getting some special help with your reading. Maybe they 
have some kind of tutoring program over at the tech school." 

"I've already checked into that. It takes two nights and all day 
Saturday. That would take so much time!" 

Sensing emotion in that reply, the father moves back to empathy. 

"That's too much of a price to pay." 

"Besides, Dad, I told the sixth graders I'd be their coach." 

"You don't want to let them down." 

"But I'll tell you this. Dad. If I really thought that tutoring course 
would help, I'd be down there every night. I'd get someone else to 
coach those kids." 

"You really want the help, but you doubt if the course will make 
a difference." 

"Do you think it would. Dad?" 

The son is once more open and logical. He's opening his father's 
autobiography again. Now the father has another opportunity to 
influence and transform. 

There are times when transformation requires no outside coun- 
sel. Often when people are really given the chance to open up. 



252 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

they unravel their own problems and the solutions become clear to 
them in the process. 

At other times, they really need additional perspective and help. 
The key is to genuinely seek the welfare of the individual, to listen 
with empathy, to let the person get to the problem and the solution 
at his own pace and time. Layer upon layer — it's like peeling an 
onion until you get to the soft inner core. 

When people are really hurting and you really listen with a pure 
desire to understand, you'll be amazed how fast they will open up. 
They want to open up. Children desperately want to open up, 
even more to their parents than to their peers. And they will, if 
they feel their parents will love them unconditionally and will be 
faithful to them afterwards and not judge or ridicule them. 

If you really seek to understand, without hypocrisy and without 
guile, there will be times when you will be literally stunned with 
the pure knowledge and understanding that will flow to you from 
another human being. It isn't even always necessary to talk in 
order to empathize. In fact, sometimes words may just get in your 
way. That's one very important reason why technique alone will 
not work. That kind of understanding transcends technique. 
Isolated technique only gets in the way. 

I have gone through the skills of empathic listening because skill 
is an important part of any habit. We need to have the skills. But 
let me reiterate that the skills will not be effective unless they come 
from a sincere desire to understand. People resent any attempt to 
manipulate them. In fact, if you're dealing with people you're close 
to, it's helpful to tell them what you're doing. 

"I read this book about listening and empathy and I thought 
about my relationship with you. I realized I haven't listened to you 
like I should. But I want to. It's hard for me. I may blow it at times, 
but I'm going to work at it. I really care about you and I want to 
understand. I hope you'll help me." Affirming your motive is a 
huge deposit. 

But if you're not sincere, I wouldn't even try it. It may create an 
openness and a vulnerability that will later turn to your harm when 
a person discovers that you really didn't care, you really didn't 
want to listen, and he's left open, exposed, and hurt. The tech- 
nique, the tip of the iceberg, has to come out of the massive base 
of character underneath. 

Now there are people who protest that empathic listening takes 
too much time. It may take a little more time initially but it saves so 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 253 

much time downstream. The most efficient thing you can do if 
you're a doctor and want to prescribe a wise treatment is to make 
an accurate diagnosis. You can't say, "I'm in too much of a hurry. 
I don't have time to make a diagnosis. Just take this treatment." 

I remember writing one time in a room on the north shore of 
Oahu, Hawaii. There was a soft breeze blowing, and so I had 
opened two windows — one at the front and one at the side — to 
keep the room cool. I had a number of papers laid out, chapter by 
chapter, on a large table. 

Suddenly, the breeze started picking up and blowing my papers 
about. I remember the frantic sense of loss I felt because things 
were no longer in order, including unnumbered pages, and I 
began rushing around the room trying desperately to put them 
back. Finally, I realized it would be better to take ten seconds and 
close one of the windows. 

Empathic listening takes time, but it doesn't take anywhere near 
as much time as it takes to back up and correct misunderstandings 
when you're already miles down the road, to redo, to live with 
unexpressed and unsolved problems, to deal with the results of 
not giving people psychological air. 

A discerning empathic listener can read what's happening down 
deep fast, and can show such acceptance, such understanding, 
that other people feel safe to open up layer after layer until they get 
to that soft inner core where the problem really lies. 

People want to be understood. And whatever investment of time 
it takes to do that will bring much greater returns of time as you 
work from an accurate understanding of the problems and issues 
and from the high Emotional Bank Account that results when a 
person feels deeply understood. 

Understanding and Perception 

As you learn to listen deeply to other people, you will discover 
tremendous differences in perception. You will also begin to 
appreciate the impact that these differences can have as people try 
to work together in interdependent situations. 

You see the young woman; I see the old lady. And both of us can 
be right. 

You may look at the world through spouse-centered glasses; I 
see it through the money-centered lens of economic concern. 



254 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

You may be scripted in the abundance mentality; I may be 
scripted in the scarcity mentahty. 

You may approach problems from a highly visual, intuitive, 
holistic right brain paradigm; I may be very left brain, very 
sequential, analytical, and verbal in my approach. 

Our perceptions can be vastly different. And yet we both have 
lived with our paradigms for years, thinking they are "facts," and 
questioning the character or the mental competence of anyone who 
can't "see the facts." 

Now, with all our differences, we're trying to work together — in 
a marriage, in a job, in a community service project — to manage 
resources and accomplish results. So how do we do it? How do we 
transcend the limits of our individual perceptions so that we can 
deeply communicate, so that we can cooperatively deal with the 
issues and come up with Win/Win solutions? 

The answer is Habit 5. It's the first step in the process of 
Win/Win. Even if (and especially when) the other person is not 
coming from that paradigm, seek first to understand. 

This principle worked powerfully for one executive who shared 
with me the following experience: 

"I was working with a small company that was in the process of 
negotiating a contract with a large national banking institution. 
This institution flew in their lawyers from San Francisco, their 
negotiator from Ohio, and presidents of two of their large banks to 
create an eight-person negotiating team. The company I worked 
with had decided to go for WinAVin or No Deal. They wanted to 
significantly increase the level of service and the cost, but they had 
been almost overwhelmed with the demands of this large financial 
institution. 

"The president of our company sat across the negotiating table 
and told them, 'We would like for you to write the contract the way 
you want it so that we can make sure we understand your needs 
and your concerns. We will respond to those needs and concerns. 
Then we can talk about pricing.' 

"The members of the negotiating team were overwhelmed. They 
were astounded that they were going to have the opportunity to 
write the contract. They took three days to come up with the deal. 

"When they presented it, the president said, 'Now let's make 
sure we understand what you want.' And he went down the 
contract, rephrasing the content, reflecting the feeling, until he 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 255 

was sure and they were sure he understood what was important to 
them. 'Yes. That's right. No, that's not exactly what we meant 
here . . . yes, you've got it now.' 

"When he thoroughly understood their perspective, he pro- 
ceeded to explain some concerns from his perspective . . . and 
they hstened. They were ready to listen. They weren't fighting for 
air. What had started out as a very formal, low-trust, almost hostile 
atmosphere had turned into a fertile environment for synergy. 

"At the conclusion of the discussions, the members of the 
negotiating team basically said, 'We want to work with vou. We 
want to do this deal. Just let us know what the price is and we'll 
sign.' " 

Then Seek to Be Understood 

Seek first to understand . . . then to be understood. Knowing how 
to be understood is the other half of Habit 5, and is equally critical 
in reaching Win/Win solutions. 

Earlier we defined maturity as the balance between courage and 
consideration. Seeking to understand requires consideration; seek- 
ing to be understood takes courage. Win/Win requires a high 
degree of both. So it becomes important in interdependent situa- 
tions for us to be understood. 

The early Greeks had a magnificent philosophy which is embod- 
ied in three sequentially arranged words: ethos, pathos, and logos. I 
suggest these three words contain the essence of seeking first to 
understand and making effective presentations. 

Ethos is your personal credibility, the faith people have in your 
integrity and competency. It's the trust that you inspire, your 
Emotional Bank Account. Pathos is the empathic side — it's the 
feeling. It means that you are in alignment with the emotional 
thrust of another person's communication. Logos is the logic, the 
reasoning part of the presentation. 

Notice the sequence: ethos, pathos, logos — your character, and 
your relationships, and then the logic of your presentation. This 
represents another major paradigm shift. Most people, in making 
presentations, go straight to the logos, the left brain logic, of their 
ideas. They try to convince other people of the validity of that logic 
without first taking ethos and pathos into consideration. 

I had an acquaintance who was very frustrated because his boss 
was locked into what he felt was an unproductive leadership style. 



256 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

"Why doesn't he do anything?" he asked me. "I've talked to him 
about it, he's aware of it, but he does nothing." 

"Well, why don't you make an effective presentation?" I asked. 

"I did," was the reply. 

"How do you define 'effective'? Who do they send back to school 
when the salesman doesn't sell — the buyer? Effective means it 
works; it means P/PC. Did you create the change you wanted? Did 
you build the relationship in the process? What were the results of 
your presentation?" 

"I told you, he didn't do anything. He wouldn't listen." 

"Then make an effective presentation. You've got to empathize 
with his head. You've got to get into his frame of mind. You've got 
to make your point simply and visually and describe the alternative 
he is in favor of better than he can himself. That will take some 
homework. Are you willing to do that?" 

"Why do I have to go through all that?" he asked. 

"In other words, you want him to change his whole leadership 
style and you're not willing to change your method of presenta- 
tion?" 

"I guess so," he replied. 

"Well, then," I said, "just smile about it and learn to live with 
it." 

"I can't live with it," he said. "It compromises my integrity." 

"Okay, then get to work on an effective presentation. That's in 
your Circle of Influence." 

In the end, he wouldn't do it. The investment seemed too great. 

Another acquaintance, a university professor, was willing to pay 
the price. He approached me one day and said, "Stephen, I can't 
get to first base in getting the funding I need for my research 
because my research is really not in the mainstream of this 
department's interests." 

"If I were you," I said, "I'd work up an effective presentation 
using ethos, pathos, and logos. I know you're sincere and the 
research you want to do would bring great benefits. Describe the 
alternative they are in favor of better than they can themselves. 
Show that you understand them in depth. Then carefully explain 
the logic behind your request." 

"Well, I'll try," he said. 

"Do you want to practice with me?" I asked. He was willing, and 
so we dress rehearsed his approach. 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 257 

When he went in to make his presentation, he started by saying, 
"Now let me see if I first understand what your objectives are, and 
what your concerns are about this presentation and my rec- 
ommendation." 

He took the time to do it slowly, gradually. In the middle of his 
presentation, demonstrating his depth of understanding and re- 
spect for their point of view, a senior professor turned to another 
professor, nodded, turned back to him, and said, "You've got your 
money." 

When you can present your own ideas clearly, specifically, 
visually, and most important, contextually — in the context of a 
deep understanding of their paradigms and concerns — you signif- 
icantly increase the credibility of your ideas. 

You're not wrapped up in your "own thing," delivering gran- 
diose rhetoric from a soapbox. You really understand. What you're 
presenting may even be different from what you had originally 
thought because in your effort to understand, you learned. 

Habit 5 lifts you to greater accuracy, greater integrity, in your 
presentations. And people know that. They know you're present- 
ing the ideas which you genuinely believe, taking all known facts 
and perceptions into consideration, that will benefit everyone. 

One on One 

Habit 5 is powerful because it is right in the middle of your Circle 
of Influence. Many factors in interdependent situations are in your 
Circle of Concern — problems, disagreements, circumstances, other 
people's behavior. And if you focus your energies out there, you 
deplete them with little positive results. 

But you can always seek first to understand. That's something 
that's within your control. And as you do that, as you focus on 
your Circle of Influence, you really, deeply understand other 
people. You have accurate information to work with, you get to the 
heart of matters quickly, you build Emotional Bank Accounts, and 
you give people the psychological air they need so you can work 
together effectively. 

It's the inside-out approach. And as you do it, watch what 
happens to your Circle of Influence. Because you really listen, you 
become influenceable. And being influenceable is the key to 
influencing others. Your circle begins to expand. You increase your 



258 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

ability to influence many of the things in your Circle of Concern. 

And watch what happens to you. The more deeply you under- 
stand other people, the more you will appreciate them, the more 
reverent you will feel about them. To touch the soul of another 
human being is to walk on holy ground. 

Habit 5 is something you can practice right now. The next time 
you communicate with anyone, you can put aside your own 
autobiography and genuinely seek to understand. Even when 
people don't want to open up about their problems, you can be 
empathic. You can sense their hearts, you can sense the hurt, and 
you can respond, "You seem down today." They may say nothing. 
That's all right. You've shown understanding and respect. 

Don't push; be patient; be respectful. People don't have to open 
up verbally before you can empathize. You can empathize all the 
time with their behavior. You can be discerning, sensitive, and 
aware and you can live outside your autobiography when that is 
needed. 

And if you're highly proactive, you can create opportunities to 
do preventive work. You don't have to wait until your son or 
daughter has a problem with school or you have your next 
business negotiation to seek first to understand. 

Spend time with your children now, one on one. Listen to them; 
understand them. Look at your home, at school life, at the 
challenges and the problems they're facing, through their eyes. 
Build the Emotional Bank Account. Give them air. 

Go out with your spouse on a regular basis. Have dinner or do 
something together you both enjoy. Listen to each other; seek to 
understand. See life through each other's eyes. 

My daily time with Sandra is something I wouldn't trade for 
anything. As well as seeking to understand each other, we often 
take time to actually practice empathic listening skills to help us in 
communicating with our children. 

We often share our different perceptions of the situation, and we 
role-play more effective approaches to difficult interpersonal family 
problems. 

I may act as if I am a son or daughter requesting a special 
privilege even though I haven't fulfilled a basic family responsibil- 
ity, and Sandra plays herself. 

We interact back and forth and try to visualize the situation in a 
very real way so that we can train ourselves to be consistent in 
modeling and teaching correct principles to our children. Some of 



HABIT 5 SEEK FIRST TO UNDERSTAND, THEN TO BE UNDERSTOOD 259 

our most helpful role-plays come from redoing a past difficult or 
stressful scene in which one of us "blew it." 

The time you invest to deeply understand the people you love 
brings tremendous dividends in open communication. Many of the 
problems that plague families and marriages simply don't have 
time to fester and develop. The communication becomes so open 
that potential problems can be nipped in the bud. And there are 
great reserves of trust in the Emotional Bank Account to handle the 
problems that do arise. 

In business, you can set up one-on-one time with your employ- 
ees. Listen to them, understand them. Set up human resource 
accounting or stakeholder information systems in your business to 
get honest, accurate feedback at every level: from customers, 
suppliers, and employees. Make the human element as important 
as the financial or the technical element. You save tremendous 
amounts of time, energy, and money when you tap into the 
human resources of a business at every level. When you listen, you 
learn. And you also give the people who work for you and with 
you psychological air. You inspire loyalty that goes well beyond 
the eight-to-five physical demands of the job. 

Seek first to understand. Before the problems come up, before 
you try to evaluate and prescribe, before you try to present your 
own ideas — seek to understand. It's a powerful habit of effective 
interdependence . 

When we really, deeply understand each other, we open the 
door to creative solutions and third alternatives. Our differences 
are no longer stumbling blocks to communication and progress. 
Instead, they become the stepping stones to synergy. 

Application Suggestions: 

1. Select a relationship in which you sense the Emotional Bank 
Account is in the red. Try to understand and write down the 
situation from the other person's point of view. In your next 
interaction, listen for understanding, comparing what you are 
hearing with what you wrote down. How valid were your 
assumptions? Did you really understand that individual's per- 
spective? 

2. Share the concept of empathy with someone close to you. Tell 
him or her you want to work on really listening to others and ask 
for feedback in a week. How did you do? How did it make that 
person feel? 



260 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

3. The next time you have an opportunity to watch people commu- 
nicate, cover your ears for a few minutes and just watch. What 
emotions are being communicated that may not come across in 
words alone? 

4. Next time you catch yourself inappropriately using one of the 
autobiographical responses — probing, evaluating, advising, or 
interpreting — try to turn the situation into a deposit by acknowl- 
edgment and apology. {"I'm sorry, 1 just realized I'm not really 
trying to understand. Could we start again?") 

5. Base your next presentation on empathy. Describe the other 
point of view as well as or better than its proponents; then seek 
to have your point understood from their frame of reference. 



Habit 6 
Synergize 

Principles of Creative Cooperation 



Interdependence 




Dependence 



261 



ISl THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



/ take as my guide the hope of a saint: 
in crucial things, unity — 
in important things, diversity — 
in all things, generosity. 

Inaugural address of President 
George Bush 



WHEN Sir Winston Churchill was called to head up the war effort 
for Great Britain, he remarked that all his life had prepared 
him for this hour. In a similar sense, the exercise of all of the other 
habits prepares us for the habit of synergy. 

When properly understood, synergy is the highest activity in all 
hfe — the true test and manifestation of all of the other habits put 
together. 

The highest forms of synergy focus the four unique human 
endov^^ments, the motive of WinAA^in, and the skills of empathic 
communication on the toughest challenges we face in life. What 
results is almost miraculous. We create new alternatives — 
something that wasn't there before. 

Synergy is the essence of principle-centered leadership. It is the 
essence of principle-centered parenting. It catalyzes, unifies, and 
unleashes the greatest powers within people. All the habits we 
have covered prepare us to create the miracle of synergy. 

What is synergy? Simply defined, it means that the whole is 



HABIT 6 SYNERGIZE 263 

greater than the sum of its parts. It means that the relationship 
which the parts have to each other is a part in and of itself. It is not 
only a part, but the most catalytic, the most empowering, the most 
unifying, and the most exciting part. 

The creative process is also the most terrifying part because you 
don't know exactly what's going to happen or where it is going to 
lead. You don't know what new dangers and challenges you'll 
find. It takes an enormous amount of internal security to begin 
with the spirit of adventure, the spirit of discovery, the spirit of 
creativity. Without doubt, you have to leave the comfort zone of 
base camp and confront an entirely new and unknown 
wilderness. You become a trailblazer, a pathfinder. You open new 
possibilities, new territories, new continents, so that others can 
follow. 

Synergy is everywhere in nature. If you plant two plants close 
together, the roots comingle and improve the quality of the soil so 
that both plants will grow better than if they were separated. If you 
put two pieces of wood together, they will hold much more than 
the total of the weight held by each separately. The whole is 
greater than the sum of its parts. One plus one equals three or 
more. 

The challenge is to apply the principles of creative cooperation, 
which we learn from nature, in our social interactions. Family life 
provides many opportunities to observe synergy and to practice it. 

The very way that a man and a woman bring a child into the 
world is synergistic. The essence of synergy is to value 
differences — to respect them, to build on strengths, to compensate 
for weaknesses. 

We obviously value the physical differences between men and 
women, husbands and wives. But what about the social, mental, 
and emotional differences? Could these differences not also be 
sources of creating new, exciting forms of life — creating an envi- 
ronment that is truly fulfilling for each person, that nurtures the 
self-esteem and self-worth of each, that creates opportunities for 
each to mature into independence and then gradually into inter- 
dependence? Could synergy not create a new script for the next 
generation — one that is more geared to service and contribution, 
and is less protective, less adversarial, less selfish; one that is more 
open, more trusting, more giving, and is less defensive, protective, 
and political; one that is more loving, more caring, and is less 
possessive and judgmental? 



264 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Synergistic Communication 

When you communicate synergistically, you are simply opening 
your mind and heart and expressions to new possibilities, new 
alternatives, new options. It may seem as if you are casting aside 
Habit 2 (to begin with the end in mind); but, in fact, you're doing 
the opposite — you're fulfilling it. You're not sure when you engage 
in synergistic communication how things will work out or what the 
end will look like, but you do have an inward sense of excitement 
and security and adventure, believing that it will be significantly 
better than it was before. And that is the end that you have in 
mind. 

You begin with the belief that parties involved will gain more 
insight, and that the excitement of that mutual learning and insight 
will create a momentum toward more and more insights, learnings, 
and growth. 

Many people have not really experienced even a moderate 
degree of synergy in their family life or in other interactions. 
They've been trained and scripted into defensive and protective 
communications or into believing that life or other people can't be 
trusted. As a result, they are never really open to Habit 6 and to 
these principles. 

This represents one of the great tragedies and wastes in life, 
because so much potential remains untapped — completely unde- 
veloped and unused. Ineffective people live day after day with 
unused potential. They experience synergy only in small, periph- 
eral ways in their lives. 

They may have memories of some unusual creative experiences, 
perhaps in athletics, where they were involved in a real team spirit 
for a period of time. Or perhaps they were in an emergency 
situation where people cooperated to an unusually high degree 
and submerged ego and pride in an effort to save someone's life or 
to produce a solution to a crisis. 

To many, such events may seem unusual, almost out of character 
with life, even miraculous. But this is not so. These things can be 
produced regularly, consistently, almost daily in people's lives. 
But it requires enormous personal security and openness and a 
spirit of adventure. 

Most all creative endeavors are somewhat unpredictable. They 
often seem ambiguous, hit-or-miss, trial and error. And unless 
people have a high tolerance for ambiguity and get their security 



HABIT 6 SYNERGIZE 265 

from integrity to principles and inner values they find it unnerving 
and unpleasant to be involved in highly creative enterprises. Their 
need for structure, certainty, and predictability is too high. 

Synergy in the Classroom 

As a teacher, I have come to believe that many truly great classes 
teeter on the very edge of chaos. Synergy tests whether teachers 
and students are really open to the principle of the whole being 
greater than the sum of its parts. 

There are times when neither the teacher nor the student knows 
for sure what's going to happen. In the beginning, there's a safe 
environment that enables people to be really open and to learn and 
to listen to each other's ideas. Then comes brainstorming, where 
the spirit of evaluation is subordinated to the spirit of creativity, 
imagining, and intellectual networking. Then an absolutely un- 
usual phenomenon begins to take place. The entire class is 
transformed with the excitement of a new thrust, a new idea, a 
new direction that's hard to define, yet it's almost palpable to the 
people involved. 

Synergy is almost as if a group collectively agrees to subordinate 
old scripts and to write a new one. 

I'll never forget a university class I taught in leadership philos- 
ophy and style. We were about three weeks into a semester when, 
in the middle of a presentation, one person started to relate some 
very powerful personal experiences which were both emotional 
and insightful. A spirit of humility and reverence fell upon the 
class — reverence toward this individual and appreciation for his 
courage. 

This spirit became fertile soil for a synergistic and creative 
endeavor. Others began to pick up on it, sharing some of their 
experiences and insights and even some of their self-doubts. The 
spirit of trust and safety prompted many to become extremely 
open. Rather than present what they prepared, they fed on each 
other's insights and ideas and started to create a whole new 
scenario as to what that class could mean. 

I was deeply involved in the process. In fact, I was almost 
mesmerized by it because it seemed so magical and creative. And 
I found myself gradually loosening up my commitment to the 
structure of the class and sensing entirely new possibilities. It 



266 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

wasn't just a flight of fancy; there was a sense of maturity and 
stability and substance which transcended by far the old structure 
and plan. 

We abandoned the old syllabus, the purchased textbooks and all 
the presentation plans, and we set up new purposes and projects 
and assignments. We became so excited about what was happen- 
ing that in about three more weeks, we all sensed an overwhelming 
desire to share what was happening with others. 

We decided to write a book containing our learnings and insights 
on the subject of our study — principles of leadership. Assignments 
were changed, new projects undertaken, new teams formed. 
People worked much harder than they ever would have in the 
original class structure, and for an entirely different set of reasons. 

Out of this experience emerged an extremely unique, cohesive, 
and synergistic culture that did not end with the semester. For 
years, alumni meetings were held among members of that class. 
Even today, many years later, when we see each other, we talk 
about it and often attempt to describe what happened and why. 

One of the interesting things to me was how little time had 
transpired before there was sufficient trust to create such synergy. 
I think it was largely because the people were relatively mature. 
They were in the final semester of their senior year, and I think 
they wanted more than just another good classroom experience. 
They were hungry for something new and exciting, something that 
they could create that was truly meaningful. It was "an idea whose 
time had come" for them. 

In addition, the chemistry was right. I felt that experiencing 
synergy was more powerful than talking about it, that producing 
something new was more meaningful than simply reading some- 
thing old. 

I've also experienced, as I believe most people have, times that 
were almost synergistic, times that hung on the edge of chaos and 
for some reason descended into it. Sadly, people who are burned 
by such experiences often begin their next new experience with 
that failure in mind. They defend themselves against it and cut 
themselves off from synergy. 

It's like administrators who set up new rules and regulations 
based on the abuses of a few people inside an organization, thus 
limiting the freedom and creative possibilities for many — or bus- 
iness partners who imagine the worst scenarios possible and write 



HABIT 6 SYNERGIZE 167 

them up in legal language, killing the whole spirit of creativity, 
enterprise, and synergistic possibility. 

As I think back on many consulting and executive education 
experiences, I can say that the highlights were almost always 
synergistic. There was usually an early moment that required 
considerable courage, perhaps in becoming extremely authentic, in 
confronting some inside truth about the individual or the organi- 
zation or the family which really needed to be said, but took a 
combination of considerable courage and genuine love to say it. 
Then others became more authentic, open, and honest, and the 
synergistic communication process began. It usually became more 
and more creative, and ended up in insights and plans that no one 
had anticipated initially. 

As Carl Rogers taught, "That which is most personal is most 
general." The more authentic you become, the more genuine in 
your expression, particularly regarding personal experiences and 
even self-doubts, the more people can relate to your expression 
and the safer it makes them feel to express themselves. That 
expression in turn feeds back on the other person's spirit, and 
genuine creative empathy takes place, producing new insights and 
learnings and a sense of excitement and adventure that keeps the 
process going. 

People then begin to interact with each other almost in half 
sentences, sometimes incoherent, but they get each other's mean- 
ings very rapidly. Then whole new worlds of insights, new 
perspectives, new paradigms that insure options, new alternatives 
are opened up and thought about. Though occasionally these new 
ideas are left up in the air, they usually come to some kind of 
closure that is practical and useful. 

Synergy in Business 

I enjoyed one particularly meaningful synergistic experience as I 
worked with my associates to create the corporate mission state- 
ment for our business. Almost all members of the company went 
high up into the mountains where, surrounded by the magnifi- 
cence of nature, we began with a first draft of what some of us 
considered to be an excellent mission statement. 

At first the communication was respectful, careful and predict- 
able. But as we began to talk about the various alternatives, 
possibilities and opportunities ahead, people became very open 



268 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

and authentic and simply started to think out loud. The mission 
statement agenda gave way to a collective free association, a 
spontaneous piggybacking of ideas. People w^ere genuinely em- 
pathic as w^ell as courageous, and w^e moved from mutual respect 
and understanding to creative synergistic communication. 

Everyone could sense it. It was exciting. As it matured, we 
returned to the task of putting the evolved collective vision into 
words, each of which contains specific and committed-to meaning 
for each participant. 

The resulting corporate mission statement reads: 

Our mission is to empower people and organizations to signifi- 
cantly increase their performance capability in order to achieve 
worthwhile purposes through understanding and living principle- 
centered leadership. 

The synergistic process that led to the creation of our mission 
statement engraved it in the hearts and minds of everyone there, 
and it has served us well as a frame of reference of what we are 
about, as well as what we are not about. 

Another high level synergy experience took place when I ac- 
cepted an invitation to serve as the resource and discussion catalyst 
at the annual planning meeting of a large insurance company. 
Several months ahead, I met with the committee responsible to 
prepare for and stage the two-day meeting which was to involve all 
the top executives. They informed me that the traditional pattern 
was to identify four or five major issues through questionnaires 
and interviews, and to have alternative proposals presented by the 
executives. Past meetings had been generally respectful exchanges, 
occasionally deteriorating into defensive Win/Lose ego battles. 
They were usually predictable, uncreative, and boring. 

As I talked with the committee members about the power of 
synergy, they could sense its potential. With considerable trepida- 
tion, they agreed to change the pattern. They requested various 
executives to prepare anonymous "white papers" on each of the 
high priority issues, and then asked all the executives to immerse 
themselves in these papers ahead of time in order to understand 
the issues and the differing points of view. They were to come to 
the meeting prepared to listen rather than to present, prepared to 
create and synergize rather than to defend and protect. 



HABIT 6 SYNERGIZE 269 

We spent the first half-day in the meeting teaching the principles 
and practicing the skills of Habits 4, 5, and 6. The rest of the time 
was spent in creative synergy. 

The release of creative energy was incredible. Excitement re- 
placed boredom. People became very open to each other's influ- 
ence and generated new insights and options. By the end of the 
meeting an entirely new understanding of the nature of the central 
company challenge evolved. The white paper proposals became 
obsolete. Differences were valued and transcended. A new com- 
mon vision began to form. 

Once people have experienced real synergy, they are never quite 
the same again. They know the possibility of having other such 
mind-expanding adventures in the future. 

Often attempts are made to recreate a particular synergistic 
experience, but this seldom can be done. However, the essential 
purpose behind creative work can be recaptured. Like the Far 
Eastern philosophy, "We seek not to imitate the masters, rather we 
seek what they sought," we seek not to imitate past creative 
synergistic experiences, rather we seek new ones around new and 
different and sometimes higher purposes. 

Synergy and Communication 

Synergy is exciting. Creativity is exciting. It's phenomenal what 
openness and communication can produce. The possibilities of 
truly significant gain, of significant improvement are so real that 
it's worth the risk such openness entails. 

After World War II, the United States commissioned David 
Lilienthal to head the new Atomic Energy Commission. Lilienthal 
brought together a group of people who were highly influential — 
celebrities in their own right — disciples, as it were, of their own 
frames of reference. 

This very diverse group of individuals had an extremely heavy 
agenda, and they were impatient to get at it. In addition, the press 
was pushing them. 

But Lilienthal took several weeks to create a high Emotional 
Bank Account. He had these people get to know each other — their 
interests, their hopes, their goals, their concerns, their back- 
grounds, their frames of reference, their paradigms. He facilitated 



270 



THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 



the kind of human interaction that creates a great bonding betw^een 
people, and he was heavily criticized for taking the time to do it 
because it w^asn't "efficient." 

But the net result was that this group became closely knit 
together, very open with each other, very creative, and synergistic. 
The respect among the members of the commission was so high 
that if there was disagreement, instead of opposition and defense, 
there was a genuine effort to understand. The attitude was "If a 
person of your intelligence and competence and commitment 
disagrees with me, then there must be something to your disagree- 
ment that I don't understand, and I need to understand it. You 
have a perspective, a frame of reference I need to look at." 
Nonprotective interaction developed, and an unusual culture was 
born. 

The following diagram illustrates how closely trust is related to 
different levels of communication. 



High 



TRUST 



Low 



LEVELS OF COMMUNICATION 



Synergistic (Win /Win) 



Respectful (Compromise) 



Defensive (Win /Lose or Lose /Win) 



Low High 

COOPERATION 



The lowest level of communication coming out of low-trust 
situations would be characterized by defensiveness, protective- 
ness, and often legalistic language, which covers all the bases and 
spells out qualifiers and the escape clauses in the event things go 
sour. Such communication produces only Win/Lose or Lose/Lose. 
It isn't effective — there's no P/PC balance — and it creates further 
reasons to defend and protect. 



HABIT 6 SYNERGIZE 271 

The middle position is respectful communication. This is the 
level where fairly mature people interact. They have respect for 
each other, but they want to avoid the possibility of ugly confron- 
tations, so they communicate politely but not empathically. They 
might understand each other intellectually, but they really don't 
deeply look at the paradigms and assumptions underlying their 
own positions and become open to new possibilities. 

Respectful communication works in independent situations and 
even in interdependent situations, but the creative possibilities 
are not opened up. In interdependent situations compromise is 
the position usually taken. Compromise means that 1 + 1 = 1^2. 
Both give and take. The communication isn't defensive or 
protective or angry or manipulative; it is honest and genuine and 
respectful. But it isn't creative or synergistic. It produces a low 
form of WinAA^in. 

Synergy means that 1 + 1 may equal 8, 16, or even 1,600. The 
synergistic position of high trust produces solutions better than 
any originally proposed, and all parties know it. Furthermore, they 
genuinely enjoy the creative enterprise. A miniculture is formed to 
satisfy in and of itself. Even if it is short lived, the P/PC balance is 
there. 

There are some circumstances in which synergy may not be 
achievable and No Deal isn't viable. But even in these circum- 
stances, the spirit of sincere trying will usually result in a more 
effective compromise. 

Fishing for the Third Alternative 

To get a better idea of how our level of communication affects 
our interdependent effectiveness, envision the following scenario: 

It's vacation time, and a husband wants to take his family out to 
the lake country to enjoy camping and fishing. This is important to 
him; he's been planning it all year. He's made reservations at a 
cottage on the lake and arranged to rent a boat, and his sons are 
really excited about going. 

His wife, however, wants to use the vacation time to visit her 
ailing mother some 250 miles away. She doesn't have the oppor- 
tunity to see her very often, and this is important to her. 

Their differences could be the cause of a major negative experi- 
ence. 

"The plans are set. The boys are excited. We should go on the 
fishing trip," he says. 



171 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

"But we don't know how much longer my mother will be 
around, and I want to be by her," she replies. "This is our only 
opportunity to have enough time to do that." 

"All year long we've looked forward to this one-week vacation. 
The boys would be miserable sitting around grandmother's house 
for a week. They'd drive everybody crazy. Besides, your mother's 
not that sick. And she has your sister less than a mile away to take 
care of her." 

"She's my mother, too. I want to be with her." 

"You could phone her every night. And we're planning to spend 
time with her at the Christmas family reunion. Remember?" 

"That's not for five more months. We don't even know if she'll 
still be here by then. Besides, she needs me, and she wants me." 

"She's being well taken care of. Besides, the boys and I need 
you, too." 

"My mother is more important than fishing." 

"Your husband and sons are more important than your mother." 

As they disagree, back and forth, they finally may come up with 
some kind of compromise. They may decide to split up — he takes 
the boys fishing at the lake while she visits her mother. And they 
both feel guilty and unhappy. The boys sense it, and it affects their 
enjoyment of the vacation. 

The husband may give in to his wife, but he does it grudgingly. 
And consciously or unconsciously, he produces evidence to fulfill 
his prophecy of how miserable the week will be for everyone. 

The wife may give in to her husband, but she's withdrawn and 
overreactive to any new developments in her mother's health 
situation. If her mother were to become seriously ill and die, the 
husband could never forgive himself, and she couldn't forgive him 
either. 

Whatever compromise they finally agree on, it could be re- 
hearsed over the years as evidence of insensitivity, neglect, or a 
bad priority decision on either part. It could be a source of 
contention for years and could even polarize the family. Many 
marriages that once were beautiful and soft and spontaneous and 
loving have deteriorated to the level of a hostility through a series 
of incidents just like this. 

The husband and wife see the situation differently. And that 
difference can polarize them, separate them, create wedges in the 
relationship. Or it can bring them closer together on a higher level. 
If they have cultivated the habits of effective interdependence, they 



HABIT 6 SYNERGI2E 273 

approach their differences from an entirely different paradigm. 
Their communication is on a higher level. 

Because they have a high Emotional Bank Account, they have 
trust and open communication in their marriage. Because they 
think Win/Win, they believe in a third alternative, a solution that is 
mutually beneficial and is better than what either of them originally 
proposed. Because they Hsten empathically and seek first to 
understand, they create within themselves and between them a 
comprehensive picture of the values and the concerns that need to 
be taken into account in making a decision. 

And the combination of those ingredients — the high Emotional 
Bank Account, thinking WinAVin, and seeking first to understand — 
creates the ideal environment for synergy. 

Buddhism calls this "the middle way." Middle in this sense does 
not mean compromise; it means higher, like the apex of the 
triangle. 

In searching for the "middle" or higher way, this husband and 
wife realize that their love, their relationship, is part of their 
synergy. 

As they communicate, the husband really, deeply feels his wife's 
desire, her need to be with her mother. He understands how she 
wants to relieve her sister, who has had the primary responsibility 
for their mother's care. He understands that they really don't know 
how long she will be with them, and that she certainly is more 
important than fishing. 

And the wife deeply understands her husband's desire to have 
the family together and to provide a great experience for the boys. 
She realizes the investment that has been made in lessons and 
equipment to prepare for this fishing vacation, and she feels the 
importance of creating good memories with them. 

So they pool those desires. And they're not on opposite sides of 
the problem. They're together on one side, looking at the problem, 
understanding the needs, and working to create a third alternative 
that will meet them. 

"Maybe we could arrange another time within the month for you 
to visit with your mother," he suggests. 'T could take over the 
home responsibilities for the weekend and arrange for some help 
at the first of the week so that you could go. I know it's important 
to you to have that time. 

"Or maybe we could locate a place to camp and fish that would 
be close to vour mother. The area wouldn't be as nice, but we could 



174: THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

still be outdoors and meet other needs as well. And the boys 
wouldn't be climbing the walls. We could even plan some recre- 
ational activities with the cousins, aunts, and uncles, which would 
be an added benefit." 

They synergize. They communicate back and forth until they 
come up with a solution they both feel good about. It's better than 
the solutions either of them originally proposed. It's better than 
compromise. It's a synergistic solution that builds P and PC. 

Instead of a transaction, it's a transformation. They get what 
they both really want and build their relationship in the process. 

Negative Synergy 

Seeking the third alternative is a major paradigm shift from the 
dichotomous, either/or mentality. But look at the difference in 
results! 

How much negative energy is typically expended when people 
try to solve problems or make decisions in an interdependent 
reality? How much time is spent in confessing other people's sins, 
politicking, rivalry, interpersonal conflict, protecting one's back- 
side, masterminding, and second guessing? It's like trying to drive 
down the road with one foot on the gas and the other foot on the 
brake! 

And instead of getting a foot off the brake, most people give it 
more gas. They try to apply more pressure, more eloquence, more 
logical information to strengthen their position. 

The problem is that highly dependent people are trying to 
succeed in an interdependent reality. They're either dependent on 
borrowing strength from position power and they go for Win/Lose, 
or they're dependent on being popular with others and they go for 
Lose/Win. They may talk Win/Win technique, but they don't really 
want to listen; they want to manipulate. And synergy can't thrive 
in that environment. 

Insecure people think that all reality should be amenable to their 
paradigms. They have a high need to clone others, to mold them 
over into their own thinking. They don't realize that the very 
strength of the relationship is in having another point of view. 
Sameness is not oneness; uniformity is not unity. Unity, or oneness, 
is complementariness, not sameness. Sameness is uncreative 
. . . and boring. The essence of synergy is to value the differences. 

I've come to believe that the key to interpersonal synergy is 
intrapersonal synergy, that is synergy within ourselves. The heart 



HABIT 6 SYNERGIZE 275 

of intrapersonal synergy is embodied in the principles in the first 
three habits, which give the internal security sufficient to handle 
the risks of being open and vulnerable. By internalizing those 
principles, we develop the abundance mentality of WinAVin and 
the authenticity of Habit 5. 

One of the very practical results of being principle-centered is 
that it makes us whole — truly integrated. People who are scripted 
deeply in logical, verbal, left-brain thinking will discover how 
totally inadequate that thinking is in solving problems which 
require a great deal of creativity. They become aware and begin to 
open up a new script inside their right brain. It's not that the right 
brain wasn't there; it just lay dormant. The muscles had not been 
developed, or perhaps they had atrophied after early childhood 
because of the heavy left-brain emphasis of formal education or 
social scripting. 

When a person has access to both the intuitive, creative, and 
visual right brain, and the analytical, logical, verbal left brain, then 
the whole brain is working. In other words, there is psychic synergy 
taking place in our own head. And this tool is best suited to the real- 
ity of what life is, because life is not just logical — it is also emotional. 

One day I was presenting a seminar which I titled, "Manage 
from the Left, Lead from the Right" to a company in Orlando, 
Florida. During the break, the president of the company came up 
to me and said, "Stephen, this is intriguing. But I have been 
thinking about this material more in terms of its application to my 
marriage than to my business. My wife and I have a real commu- 
nication problem. I wonder if you would have lunch with the two 
of us and just kind of watch how we talk to each other?" 

"Let's do it," I replied. 

As we sat down together, we exchanged a few pleasantries. 
Then this man turned to his wife and said, "Now, honey, I've 
invited Stephen to have lunch with us to see if he could help us in 
our communication with each other. I know you feel I should be a 
more sensitive, considerate husband. Could you give me some- 
thing specific you think I ought to do?" His dominant left brain 
wanted facts, figures, specifics, parts. 

"Well, as I've told you before, it's nothing specific. It's more of 
a general sense I have about priorities." Her dominant right brain 
was dealing with sensing and with the gestalt, the whole, the 
relationship between the parts. 

"What do you mean, 'a general feeling about priorities'? What is 



176 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

it you w^ant me to do? Give me something specific I can get a 
handle on." 

"Well, it's just a feeling." Her right brain w^as dealing in images, 
intuitive feelings. "I just don't think our marriage is as important to 
you as you tell me it is." 

"Well, what can I do to make it more important? Give me 
something concrete and specific to go on." 

"It's hard to put into w^ords." 

At that point, he just rolled his eyes and looked at me as if to say, 
"Stephen, could you endure this kind of dumbness in your 
marriage?" 

"It's just a feeling," she said, "a very strong feeling." 

"Honey," he said to her, "that's your problem. And that's the 
problem with your mother. In fact, it's the problem with every 
woman I know." 

Then he began to interrogate her as though it were some kind of 
legal deposition. 

"Do you live where you want to live?" 

"That's not it," she sighed. "That's not it at all." 

"I know," he replied with a forced patience. "But since you won't 
tell me exactly what it is, I figure the best way to find out what it is 
is to find out what it is not. Do you live where you want to live?" 

"I guess." 

"Honey, Stephen's here for just a few minutes to try to help us. 
Just give a quick 'yes' or 'no' answer. Do you live where you want 
to live?" 

"Yes." 

"Okay. That's settled. Do you have the things you want to 
have?" 

"Yes." 

"All right. Do you do the things you want to do?" 

This went on for a little while, and I could see I wasn't helping 
at all. So I intervened and said, "Is this kind of how it goes in your 
relationship?" 

"Every day, Stephen," he replied. 

"It's the story of our marriage," she sighed. 

I looked at the two of them and the thought crossed my mind 
that they were two half-brained people living together. "Do you 
have any children?" I asked. 

"Yes, two." 

"Really?" I asked incredulously. "How did you do it?" 



HABIT 6 SYNERGIZE 177 

"What do you mean how did we do it?" 

"You were synergistic!" I said. "One plus one usually equals 
two. But you made one plus one equal four. Now that's synergy. 
The whole is greater than the sum of the parts. So how did you do 
it?" 

"You know how we did it," he replied. 

"You must have valued the differences!" I exclaimed. 

Valuing the Differences 

Valuing the differences is the essence of synergy — the mental, 
the emotional, the psychological differences between people. And 
the key to valuing those differences is to realize that all people see 
the world, not as it is, but as they are. 

If I think I see the world as it is, why would I want to value the 
differences? Why would I even want to bother with someone who's 
"off track"? My paradigm is that I am objective; I see the world as 
it is. Everyone else is buried by the minutia, but I see the larger 
picture. That's why they call me a supervisor — I have super vision. 

If that's my paradigm, then I will never be effectively interde- 
pendent, or even effectively independent, for that matter. I will be 
limited by the paradigms of my own conditioning. 

The person who is truly effective has the humility and reverence 
to recognize his own perceptual limitations and to appreciate the 
rich resources available through interaction with the hearts and 
minds of other human beings. That person values the differences 
because those differences add to his knowledge, to his understand- 
ing of reality. When we're left to our own experiences, we 
constantly suffer from a shortage of data. 

Is it logical that two people can disagree and that both can be 
right? It's not logical: it's psychological. And it's very real. You see 
the young lady; I see the old woman. We're both looking at the 
same picture, and both of us are right. We see the same black lines, 
the same white spaces. But we interpret them differently because 
we've been conditioned to interpret them differently. 

And unless we value the differences in our perceptions, unless 
we value each other and give credence to the possibility that we're 
both right, that life is not always a dichotomous either/or, that 
there are almost always third alternatives, we will never be able to 
transcend the limits of that conditioning. 

All I may see is the old woman. But I realize that you see 



us THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

something else. And I value you. I value your perception. I w^ant to 
understand. 

So w^hen I become aw^are of the difference in our perceptions, I 
say, "Good! You see it differently! Help me see what you see." 

If two people have the same opinion, one is unnecessary. It's not 
going to do me any good at all to communicate with someone else 
who sees only the old woman also. I don't want to talk, to 
communicate, with someone who agrees with me; I want to 
communicate with you because you see it differently. 1 value that 
difference. 

By doing that, I not only increase my own awareness; I also 
affirm you. I give you psychological air. I take my foot off the brake 
and release the negative energy you may have invested in defend- 
ing a particular position. I create an environment for synergy. 

The importance of valuing the difference is captured in an often 
quoted fable called "The Animal School," written by educator Dr. 
R. H. Reeves: 

Once upon a time, the animals decided they must do something 
heroic to meet the problems of a "New World," so they organized a 
school. They adopted an activity curriculum consisting of running, 
climbing, swimming and flying. To make it easier to administer, all 
animals took all the subjects. 

The duck was excellent in swimming, better in fact than his 
instructor, and made excellent grades in flying, but he was very 
poor in running. Since he was low in running he had to stay after 
school and also drop swimming to practice running. This was kept 
up until his web feet were badly worn and he was only average in 
swimming. But average was acceptable in school, so nobody worried 
about that except the duck. 

The rabbit started at the top of the class in running, but had a 
nervous breakdown because of so much makeup in swimming. 

The squirrel was excellent in climbing until he developed frustra- 
tions in the flying class where his teacher made him start from the 
ground up instead of from the tree-top down. He also developed 
charley horses from over-exertion and he got a C in climbing and a 
D in running. 

The eagle was a problem child and had to be disciplined severely. 
In climbing class he beat all the others to the top of the tree, but 
insisted on using his own way of getting there. 

At the end of the year, an abnormal eel that could swim 
exceedingly well and also could run, climb and fly a little had the 
highest average and was valedictorian. 



HABIT 6 SYNERGIZE US 

The prairie dogs stayed out of school and fought the tax levy 
because the administration would not add digging and burrowing to 
the curriculum. They apprenticed their children to the badger and 
later joined the groundhogs and gophers to start a successful private 
school. 



Force Field Analysis 

In an interdependent situation, synergy is particularly powerful 
in dealing with negative forces that work against growth and 
change. 

Sociologist Kurt Lewin developed a "Force Field Analysis" 
model in which he described any current level of performance or 
being as a state of equilibrium between the driving forces that 
encourage upward movement and the restraining forces that 
discourage it. 

Driving forces generally are positive, reasonable, logical, con- 
scious, and economic. In juxtaposition, restraining forces are 
often negative, emotional, illogical, unconscious, and social/ 
psychological. Both sets of forces are very real and must be taken 
into account in dealing with change. 



Restraining Forces 



Driving Forces 



In a family, for example, you have a certain "climate" in the 
home — a certain level of positive or negative interaction, of feeling 



280 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

safe or unsafe in expressing feelings or talking about concerns, of 
respect or disrespect in communication among family members. 

You may really want to change that level. You may w^ant to 
create a climate that is more positive, more respectful, more open 
and trusting. Your logical reasons for doing that are the driving 
forces that act to raise the level. 

But increasing those driving forces is not enough. Your efforts 
are opposed by restraining forces — by the competitive spirit be- 
tween children in the family, by the different scripting of home life 
you and your spouse have brought to the relationship, by habits 
that have developed in the family, by work or other demands on 
your time and energies. 

Increasing the driving forces may bring results — for a while. But 
as long as the restraining forces are there, it becomes increasingly 
harder. It's like pushing against a spring: the harder you push, the 
harder it is to push until the force of the spring suddenly thrusts 
the level back down. 

The resulting up and down, yo-yo effect causes you to feel, after 
several attempts, that people are "just the way they are" and that 
"it's too difficult to change." 

But when you introduce synergy, you use the motive of Habit 4, 
the skill of Habit 5, and the interaction of Habit 6 to work directly 
on the restraining forces. You create an atmosphere in which it is 
safe to talk about these forces. You unfreeze them, loosen them up, 
and create new insights that actually transform those restraining 
forces into driving ones. You involve people in the problem, 
immerse them in it, so that they soak it in and feel it is their 
problem and they tend to become an important part of the 
solution. 

As a result, new goals, shared goals, are created, and the whole 
enterprise moves upward, often in ways that no one could have 
anticipated. And the excitement contained within that movement 
creates a new culture. The people involved in it are enmeshed in 
each other's humanity and empowered by new, fresh thinking, by 
new creative alternatives and opportunities. 

I've been involved several times in negotiations between people 
who were angry at each other and hired lawyers to defend their 
positions. And all that did was to exacerbate the problem because 
the interpersonal communication deteriorated as it went through 
the legal process. But the trust level was so low that the parties felt 
they had no other alternative than to take the issues to court. 



HABIT 6 SYNERGIZE 281 

"Would you be interested in going for a Win/Win solution that 
both parties feel really good about?" I would ask. 

The response was usually affirmative, but most people didn't 
really think it was possible. 

"If I can get the other party to agree, would you be willing to 
start the process of really communicating with each other?" 

Again, the answer was usually "yes." 

The results in almost every case have been astounding. Problems 
that had been legally and psychologically wrangled about for 
months have been settled in a matter of a few hours or days. Most 
of the solutions weren't the courthouse compromise solutions, 
either; they were synergistic, better than the solutions proposed 
independently by either party. And, in most cases, the relation- 
ships continued even though it had appeared in the beginning that 
the trust level was so low and the rupture in the relationship so 
large as to be almost irreparable. 

At one of our development programs, an executive reported a 
situation where a manufacturer was being sued by a longtime 
industrial customer for lack of performance. Both parties felt totally 
justified in the rightness of their position and perceived each other 
as unethical and completely untrustworthy. 

As they began to practice Habit 5, two things became clear. First, 
early communication problems resulted in a misunderstanding 
which was later exacerbated by accusations and counteraccusa- 
tions. Second, both were initially acting in good faith and didn't 
like the cost and hassle of a legal fight, but saw no other way out. 

Once these two things became clear, the spirit of Habits 4, 5, and 
6 took over, the problem was rapidly resolved, and the relationship 
continues to prosper. 

In another circumstance, I received an early morning phone call 
from a land developer desperately searching for help. The bank 
wanted to foreclose because he was not complying with the 
principal and interest payment schedule, and he was suing the 
bank to avoid the foreclosure. He needed additional funding to 
finish and market the land so that he could repay the bank, but the 
bank refused to provide additional funds until scheduled payments 
were met. It was a chicken and egg problem with undercapitahza- 
tion. 

In the meantime, the project was languishing. The streets were 



282 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

beginning to look like weed fields, and the owners of the few 
homes that had been built were up in arms as they saw their 
property values drop. The city was also upset over the "prime 
land" project falling behind schedule and becoming an eyesore. 
Tens of thousands of dollars in legal costs had already been spent 
by the bank and the developer and the case wasn't scheduled to 
come to court for several months. 

In desperation, this developer reluctantly agreed to try the 
principles of Habits 4, 5, and 6. He arranged a meeting with even 
more reluctant bank officials. 

The meeting started at 8 a.m. in one of the bank conference 
rooms. The tension and mistrust were palpable. The attorney for 
the bank had committed the bank officials to say nothing. They 
were only to listen and he alone would speak. He wanted nothing 
to happen that would compromise the bank's position in court. 

For the first hour and a half, I taught Habits 4, 5, and 6. At 9:30 
I went to the blackboard and wrote down the bank's concerns 
based on our prior understanding. Initially the bank officials said 
nothing, but the more we communicated Win/Win intentions and 
sought first to understand, the more they opened up to explain 
and clarify. 

As they began to feel understood, the whole atmosphere 
changed and a sense of momentum, of excitement over the 
prospect of peacefully settling the problem was clearly evident. 
Over the attorney's objections the bank officials opened up even 
more, even about personal concerns. "When we walk out of here 
the first thing the bank president will say is, 'Did we get our 
money?' What are we going to say?" 

By 11:00, the bank officers were still convinced of their rightness, 
but they felt understood and were no longer defensive and 
officious. At that point, they were sufficiently open to listen to the 
developer's concerns, which we wrote down on the other side of 
the blackboard. This resulted in deeper mutual understanding and 
a collective awareness of how poor early communication had 
resulted in misunderstanding and unrealistic expectations, and 
how continuous communication in a Win/Win spirit could have 
prevented the subsequent major problems from developing. 

The shared sense of both chronic and acute pain combined with 
a sense of genuine progress kept everyone communicating. By 
noon, when the meeting was scheduled to end, the people were 
positive, creative, and synergistic and wanted to keep talking. 



HABIT 6 SYNERGIZE 283 

The very first recommendarion made by the developer was seen 
as a beginning WinA^^in approach by all. It was synergized on and 
improved, and at 12:45 p.m. the developer and the two bank officers 
left with a plan to present together to the Home Owners Associa- 
tion and the city. Despite subsequent complicating developments, 
the legal fight was aborted and the building project continued to a 
successful conclusion. 

I am not suggesting that people should not use legal processes. 
Some situations absolutely require it. But I see it as a court of last, 
not first, resort. If it is used too early, even in a preventive sense, 
sometimes fear and the legal paradigm create subsequent thought 
and action processes that are not synergistic. 

All Nature Is Synergistic 

Ecology is a word which basically describes the synergism in 
nature — everything is related to everything else. It's in the rela- 
tionship that creative powers are maximized, just as the real power 
in these Seven Habits is in their relationship to each other, not just 
in the individual habits themselves. 

The relationship of the parts is also the power in creating a 
synergistic culture inside a family or an organization. The more 
genuine the involvement, the more sincere and sustained the 
participation in analyzing and solving problems, the greater the 
release of everyone's creativity, and of their commitment to what 
they create. This, I'm convinced, is the essence of the power in the 
Japanese approach to business, which has changed the world 
marketplace. 

Synergy works; it's a correct principle. It is the crowning 
achievement of all the previous habits. It is effectiveness in an 
interdependent reality — it is teamwork, team building, the devel- 
opment of unity and creativity with other human beings. 

Although you cannot control the paradigms of others in an 
interdependent interaction or the synergistic process itself, a great 
deal of synergy is within your Circle of Influence. 

Your own internal synergy is completely within the circle. You 
can respect both sides of your own nature — the analytical side and 
the creative side. You can value the difference between them and 
use that difference to catalyze creativity. 

You can be synergistic within yourself even in the midst of a very 



284 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

adversarial environment. You don't have to take insults personally. 
You can sidestep negative energy; you can look for the good in 
others and utilize that good, as different as it may be, to improve 
your point of view and to enlarge your perspective. 

You can exercise the courage in interdependent situations to be 
open, to express your ideas, your feelings, and your experiences in 
a way that will encourage other people to be open also. 

You can value the difference in other people. When someone 
disagrees with you, you can say, "Good! You see it differently." 
You don't have to agree with them; you can simply affirm them. 
And you can seek to understand. 

When you see only two alternatives — yours and the "wrong" 
one — you can look for a synergistic third alternative. There's 
almost always a third alternative, and if you work with a Win/Win 
philosophy and really seek to understand, you usually can find a 
solution that will be better for everyone concerned. 

Application Suggestions: 

1. Think about a person who typically sees things differently than 
you do. Consider ways in which those differences might be used 
as stepping-stones to third alternative solutions. Perhaps you 
could seek out his or her views on a current project or problem, 
valuing the different views you are likely to hear. 

2. Make a list of people who irritate you. Do they represent different 
views that could lead to synergy if you had greater intrinsic 
security and valued the difference? 

3. Identify a situation in which you desire greater teamwork and 
synergy. What conditions would need to exist to support syn- 
ergy? What can you do to create those conditions? 

4. The next time you have a disagreement or confrontation with 
someone, attempt to understand the concerns underlying that 
person's position. Address those concerns in a creative and 
mutually beneficial way. 



Part Four 



RENEWAL 




Habit 7 
Sharpen the Saw 

Principles of Balanced 
Self-Renewal 



Sometimes when I consider what tremendous 
consequences come from little things . . . 
I am tempted to think . . . 
there are no little things. 

Bruce Barton 



SUPPOSE YOU WERE TO COME UPON SOMEONE in the woods working 
feverishly to saw down a tree. 

"What are you doing?" you ask. 

"Can't you see?" comes the impatient reply. "I'm sawing down 
this tree." 

"You look exhausted!" you exclaim. "How long have you been 
at it?" 

"Over five hours," he returns, "and I'm beat! This is hard 
work." 

"Well, why don't you take a break for a few minutes and 
sharpen that saw?" you inquire. "I'm sure it would go a lot faster." 

"I don't have time to sharpen the saw," the man says emphat- 
ically. "I'm too busy sawing!" 

Habit 7 is taking time to sharpen the saw. It surrounds the other 
habits on the Seven Habits paradigm because it is the habit that 
makes all the others possible. 



287 



288 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Four Dimensions of Renewal 

Habit 7 is personal PC. It's preserving and enhancing the 
greatest asset you have — you. It's renew^ing the four dimensions of 
your nature — physical, spiritual, mental, and social/emotional. 

PHYSICAL 

Exercise, Nutrition, 
Stress Management 



MENTAL 

Reading, Visualizing, 
Planning, Writing 



SOCIAL/EMOTIONAL 

Service, Empathy, 
Synergy, Intrinsic Security 



SPIRITUAL 

Value Clarification 

& Commitment, Study 

& Meditation 



Although different words are used, most philosophies of hfe 
deal either explicitly or implicitly with these four dimensions. 
Philosopher Herb Shepherd describes the healthy balanced life 
around four values: perspective (spiritual), autonomy (mental), 
connectedness (social), and tone (physical). George Sheehan, the 
running guru, describes four roles: being a good animal (physical), 
a good craftsman (mental), a good friend (social), and a saint 
(spiritual). Sound motivation and organization theory embrace 
these four dimensions or motivations — the economic (physical); 
how people are treated (social); how people are developed and 
used (mental); and the service, the job, the contribution the 
organization gives (spiritual). 

"Sharpen the saw" basically means expressing all four motiva- 



HABIT 7 SHARPEN THE SAW 289 

tions. It means exercising all four dimensions of our nature, 
regularly and consistently in wise and balanced ways. 

To do this, we must be proactive. Taking time to sharpen the 
saw is a definite Quadrant II activity, and Quadrant II must be 
acted on. Quadrant I, because of its urgency, acts on us; it presses 
upon us constantly. Personal P/C must be pressed upon until it 
becomes second nature, until it becomes a kind of healthy addic- 
tion. Because it's at the center of our Circle of Influence, no one 
else can do it for us. We must do it for ourselves. 

This is the single most powerful investment we can ever make in 
life — investment in ourselves, in the only instrument we have with 
which to deal with life and to contribute. We are the instruments of 
our own performance, and to be effective, we need to recognize the 
importance of taking time regularly to sharpen the saw in all four 
ways. 

The Physical Dimension 

The physical dimension involves caring effectively for our phys- 
ical body — eating the right kinds of foods, getting sufficient rest 
and relaxation, and exercising on a regular basis. 

Exercise is one of those Quadrant II, high-leverage activities that 
most of us don't do consistently because it isn't urgent. And 
because we don't do it, sooner or later we find ourselves in 
Quadrant I, dealing with the health problems and crises that come 
as a natural result of our neglect. 

Most of us think we don't have enough time to exercise. What a 
distorted paradigm! We don't have time not to. We're talking about 
three to six hours a week — or a minimum of thirty minutes a day, 
every other day. That hardly seems an inordinate amount of time 
considering the tremendous benefits in terms of the impact on the 
other 162-165 hours of the week. 

And you don't need any special equipment to do it. If you want 
to go to a gym or a spa to use the equipment or enjoy some skill 
sports such as tennis or racquetball, that's an added opportunity. 
But it isn't necessary to sharpen the saw. 

A good exercise program is one that you can do in your own 
home and one that will build your body in three areas: endurance, 
flexibility, and strength. 

Endurance comes from aerobic exercise, from cardiovascular 
efficiency — the ability of your heart to pump blood through your 
body. 



290 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Although the heart is a muscle, it cannot be exercised directly. It 
can only be exercised through the large muscle groups, particularly 
the leg muscles. That's why exercises like rapid walking, running, 
biking, swimming, cross-country skiing, and jogging are so bene- 
ficial. 

You are considered minimally fit if you can increase your heart 
rate to at least one hundred beats per minute and keep it at that 
level for thirty minutes. 

Ideally you should try to raise your heart rate to at least sixty 
percent of your maximum pulse rate, the top speed your heart can 
beat and still pump blood through your body. Your maximum 
heart rate is generally accepted to be 220 less your age. So, if you 
are 40, you should aim for an exercise heart rate of 108 (220 — 40 = 
180 x .6 = 108). The "training effect" is generally considered to be 
between 72 percent and 87 percent of your personal maximum 
rate. 

Flexibility comes through stretching. Most experts recommend 
warming up before and cooling down/stretching after aerobic 
exercise. Before, it helps loosen and warm the muscles to prepare 
for more vigorous exercise. After, it helps to dissipate the lactic 
acid so that you don't feel sore and stiff. 

Strength comes from muscle resistance exercises — like simple cal- 
isthenics, push-ups, pull-ups, and sit-ups, and from working with 
weights. How much emphasis you put on developing strength 
depends on your situation. If you're involved in physical labor or 
athletic activities, increased strength will improve your skill. If you 
have a basically sedentary job and success in your life-style does 
not require a lot of strength, a little toning through calisthenics in 
addition to your aerobic and stretching exercises might be suffi- 
cient. 

I was in a gym one time with a friend of mine who has a Ph.D. 
in exercise physiology. He was focusing on building strength. He 
asked me to "spot" him while he did some bench presses and told 
me at a certain point he'd ask me to take the weight. "But don't 
take it until I tell you," he said firmly. 

So I watched and waited and prepared to take the weight. The 
weight went up and down, up and down. And I could see it begin 
to get harder. But he kept going. He would start to push it up and 
I'd think, "There's no way he's going to make it." But he'd make 
it. Then he'd slowly bring it back down and start back up again. Up 
and down, up and down. 



HABIT 7 SHARPEN THE SAW 291 

Finally, as I looked at his face, straining with the effort, his blood 
vessels practically jumping out of his skin, I thought, "This is 
going to fall and collapse his chest. Maybe I should take the 
weight. Maybe he's lost control and he doesn't even know what 
he's doing." But he'd get it safely down. Then he'd start back up 
again. I couldn't believe it. 

When he finally told me to take the weight, I said, "Why did you 
wait so long?" 

"Almost all the benefit of the exercise comes at the very end, 
Stephen," he replied. "I'm trying to build strength. And that 
doesn't happen until the muscle fiber ruptures and the nerve fiber 
registers the pain. Then nature overcompensates and within 48 
hours, the fiber is made stronger," 

I could see his point. It's the same principle that works with 
emotional muscles as well, such as patience. When you exercise 
your patience beyond your past limits, the emotional fiber is bro- 
ken, nature overcompensates, and next time the fiber is stronger. 

Now my friend wanted to build muscular strength. And he 
knew how to do it. But not all of us need to develop that kind of 
strength to be effective. "No pain, no gain" has validity in some 
circumstances, but it is not the essence of an effective exercise 
program. 

The essence of renewing the physical dimension is to sharpen 
the saw, to exercise our bodies on a regular basis in a way that will 
preserve and enhance our capacity to work and adapt and enjoy. 

And we need to be wise in developing an exercise program. 
There's a tendency, especially if you haven't been exercising at all, 
to overdo. And that can create unnecessary pain, injury, and even 
permanent damage. It's best to start slowly. Any exercise program 
should be in harmony with the latest research findings, with your 
doctor's recommendations and with your own self-awareness. 

If you haven't been exercising, your body will undoubtedly 
protest this change in its comfortable downhill direction. You 
won't like it at first. You may even hate it. But be proactive. Do it 
anyway. Even if it's raining on the morning you've scheduled to 
jog, do it anyway. "Oh good! It's raining! I get to develop my 
willpower as well as my body!" 

You're not deahng with quick fix; you're dealing with a Quadrant 
II activity that will bring phenomenal long-term results. Ask 
anyone who has done it consistently. Little by little, your resting 
pulse rate will go down as your heart and oxygen processing 



292 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

system becomes more efficient. As you increase your body's ability 
to do more demanding things, you'll find your normal activities 
much more comfortable and pleasant. You'll have more afternoon 
energy, and the fatigue you've felt that's made you "too tired" to 
exercise in the past will be replaced by an energy that will 
invigorate everything you do. 

Probably the greatest benefit you will experience from exercising 
will be the development of your Habit 1 muscles of proactivity. As 
you act based on the value of physical well-being instead of 
reacting to all the forces that keep you from exercising, your 
paradigm of yourself, your self-esteem, your self-confidence, and 
your integrity will be profoundly affected. 

The Spiritual Dimension 

Renewing the spiritual dimension provides leadership to your 
life. It's highly related to Habit 2. 

The spiritual dimension is your core, your center, your commit- 
ment to your value system. It's a very private area of life and a 
supremely important one. It draws upon the sources that inspire 
and uplift you and tie you to the timeless truths of all humanity. 
And people do it very, very differently. 

I find renewal in daily prayerful meditation on the scriptures 
because they represent my value system. As I read and meditate, 
I feel renewed, strengthened, centered and recommitted to serve. 

Immersion in great literature or great music can provide a similar 
renewal of the spirit for some. There are others who find it in the 
way they communicate with nature. Nature bequeaths its own 
blessing on those who immerse themselves in it. When you're able 
to leave the noise and the discord of the city and give yourself up 
to the harmony and rhythm of nature, you come back renewed. 
For a time, you're undisturbable, almost unflappable, until grad- 
ually the noise and the discord from outside start to invade that 
sense of inner peace. 

Arthur Gordon shares a wonderful, intimate story of his own 
spiritual renewal in a little story called "The Turn of the Tide." It 
tells of a time in his life when he began to feel that everything was 
stale and flat. His enthusiasm waned; his writing efforts were 
fruitless. And the situation was growing worse day by day. 

Finally, he determined to get help from a medical doctor. 
Observing nothing physically wrong, the doctor asked him if he 
would be able to follow his instructions for one day. 



HABIT 7 SHARPEN THE SAW 293 

When Gordon replied that he could, the doctor told him to 
spend the following day in the place where he was happiest as a 
child. He could take food, but he was not to talk to anyone or to 
read or write or listen to the radio. He then wrote out four 
prescriptions and told him to open one at nine, twelve, three, and 
six o'clock. 

"Are you serious?" Gordon asked him. 

"You won't think I'm joking when you get my bill!" was the 
reply. 

So the next morning, Gordon went to the beach. As he opened 
the first prescription, he read "Listen carefully." He thought the 
doctor was insane. How could he listen for three hours? But he had 
agreed to follow the doctor's orders, so he listened. He heard the 
usual sounds of the sea and the birds. After a while, he could hear 
the other sounds that weren't so apparent at first. As he listened, 
he began to think of lessons the sea had taught him as a 
child — patience, respect, an awareness of the interdependence of 
things. He began to hsten to the sounds — and the silence — and to 
feel a growing peace. 

At noon, he opened the second slip of paper and read "Try 
reaching back." "Reaching back to what?" he wondered. Perhaps 
to childhood, perhaps to memories of happy times. He thought 
about his past, about the many little moments of joy. He tried to 
remember them with exactness. And in remembering, he found a 
growing warmth inside. 

At three o'clock, he opened the third piece of paper. Until now, 
the prescriptions had been easy to take. But this one was different; 
it said "Examine your motives." At first he was defensive. He 
thought about what he wanted — success, recognition, security — 
and he justified them all. But then the thought occurrred to him 
that those motives weren't good enough, and that perhaps therein 
was the answer to his stagnant situation. 

He considered his motives deeply. He thought about past 
happiness. And at last, the answer came to him. 

"In a flash of certainty," he wrote, "I saw that if one's motives 
are wrong, nothing can be right. It makes no difference whether 
you are a mailman, a hairdresser, an insurance salesman, a 
housewife — whatever. As long as you feel you are serving others, 
you do the job well. When you are concerned only with helping 
yourself, you do it less well — a law as inexorable as gravity." 

When six o'clock came, the final prescription didn't take long 
to fill. "Write your worries on the sand," it said. He knelt and 



294 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

wrote several words with a piece of broken shell; then he turned 
and walked away. He didn't look back; he knew the tide would 
come in. 

Spiritual renewal takes an investment of time. But it's a Quadrant 
II activity we don't really have time to neglect. 

The great reformer Martin Luther is quoted as saying, "I have so 
much to do today, I'll need to spend another hour on my knees." 
To him, prayer was not a mechanical duty but rather a source of 
power in releasing and multiplying his energies. 

Someone once inquired of a Far Eastern Zen master, who had a 
great serenity and peace about him no matter what pressures he 
faced, "How do you maintain that serenity and peace?" He 
replied, "I never leave my place of meditation." He meditated 
early in the morning and for the rest of the day, he carried the 
peace of those moments with him in his mind and heart. 

The idea is that when we take time to draw on the leadership 
center of our hves, what life is ultimately all about, it spreads like 
an umbrella over everything else. It renews us, it refreshes us, 
particularly if we recommit to it. 

This is why I believe a personal mission statement is so impor- 
tant. If we have a deep understanding of our center and our 
purpose, we can review and recommit to it frequently. In our daily 
spiritual renewal, we can visualize and "live out" the events of the 
day in harmony with those values. 

Religious leader David O. McKay taught, "The greatest battles of 
life are fought out daily in the silent chambers of the soul." If you 
win the battles there, if you settle the issues that inwardly conflict, 
you feel a sense of peace, a sense of knowing what you're about. 
And you'll find that the public victories — where you tend to think 
cooperatively, to promote the welfare and good of other people, 
and to be genuinely happy for other people's successes — will 
follow naturally. 

The Mental Dimension 

Most of our mental development and study discipline comes 
through formal education. But as soon as we leave the external 
discipline of school, many of us let our minds atrophy. We don't 
do any more serious reading, we don't explore new subjects in any 
real depth outside our action fields, we don't think analytically, we 
don't write — at least not critically or in a way that tests our ability 



HABIT 7 SHARPEN THE SAW 295 

to express ourselves in distilled, clear, and concise language. 
Instead, we spend our time watching TV. 

Continuing surveys indicate that television is on in most homes 
some thirty-five to forty-five hours a week. That's as much time as 
many people put into their jobs, more than most put into school. 
It's the most powerful socializing influence there is. And when we 
watch, we're subject to all the values that are being taught through 
it. That can powerfully influence us in very subtle and impercep- 
tible ways. 

Wisdom in watching television requires the effective self- 
management of Habit 3, which enables you to discriminate and to 
select the informing, inspiring, and entertaining programs which 
best serve and express your purpose and values. 

In our family, we limit television watching to around seven 
hours a week, an average of about an hour a day. We had a family 
council at which we talked about it and looked at some of the data 
regarding what's happening in homes because of television. We 
found that by discussing it as a family when no one was defensive 
or argumentative, people started to realize the dependent sickness 
of becoming addicted to soap operas or to a steady diet of a 
particular program. 

I'm grateful for television and for the many high quality educa- 
tional and entertainment programs. They can enrich our lives and 
contribute meaningfully to our purposes and goals. But there are 
many programs that simply waste our time and minds and many 
that influence us in negative ways if we let them. Like the body, 
television is a good servant but a poor master. We need to practice 
Habit 3 and manage ourselves effectively to maximize the use of 
any resource in accomplishing our missions. 

Education — continuing education, continually honing and ex- 
panding the mind — is vital mental renewal. Sometimes that in- 
volves the external discipline of the classroom or systematized 
study programs; more often it does not. Proactive people can 
figure out many, many ways to educate themselves. 

It is extremely valuable to train the mind to stand apart and 
examine its own program. That, to me, is the definition of a liberal 
education — the ability to examine the programs of life against larger 
questions and purposes and other paradigms. Training, without 
such education, narrows and closes the mind so that the assump- 
tions underlying the training are never examined. That's why it is so 
valuable to read broadly and to expose yourself to great minds. 



296 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

There's no better way to inform and expand your mind on a 
regular basis than to get into the habit of reading good literature. 
That's another high leverage Quadrant II activity. You can get into 
the best minds that are now or that have ever been in the world. I 
highly recommend starting with a goal of a book a month, then a 
book every two weeks, then a book a week. "The person who 
doesn't read is no better off than the person who can't read." 

Quality literature, such as the Great Books, the Harvard Classics, 
autobiographies. National Geographic and other publications that 
expand our cultural awareness, and current literature in various 
fields can expand our paradigms and sharpen our mental saw, 
particularly if we practice Habit 5 as we read and seek first to 
understand. If we use our own autobiography to make early 
judgments before we really understand what an author has to say, 
we limit the benefits of the reading experience. 

Writing is another powerful way to sharpen the mental saw. 
Keeping a journal of our thoughts, experiences, insights, and 
learnings promotes mental clarity, exactness, and context. Writing 
good letters — communicating on the deeper level of thoughts, 
feelings, and ideas rather than on the shallow, superficial level of 
events — also affects our ability to think clearly, to reason accu- 
rately, and to be understood effectively. 

Organizing and planning represent other forms of mental re- 
newal associated with Habits 2 and 3. It's beginning with the end 
in mind and being able mentally to organize to accomplish that 
end. It's exercising the visualizing, imagining power of your mind 
to see the end from the beginning and to see the entire journey, at 
least in principles, if not in steps. 

It is said that wars are won in the general's tent. Sharpening the 
saw in the first three dimensions — the physical, the spiritual, and 
the mental — is a practice I call the "Daily Private Victory." And I 
commend to you the simple practice of spending one hour a day 
every day doing it — one hour a day for the rest of your life. 

There's no other way you could spend an hour that would begin 
to compare with the Daily Private Victory in terms of value and 
results. It will affect every decision, every relationship. It will 
greatly improve the quality, the effectiveness, of every other hour 
of the day, including the depth and restfulness of your sleep. It will 
build the long-term physical, spiritual, and mental strength to 
enable you to handle difficult challenges in life. 

In the words of Phillips Brooks, 



HABIT 7 SHARPEN THE SAW 197 

Some day, in the years to come, you will be wrestling with the 
great temptation, or trembling under the great sorrow of your life. 
But the real struggle is here, now . . . Now it is being decided 
whether, in the day of your supreme sorrow or temptation, you 
shall miserably fail or gloriously conquer. Character cannot be made 
except by a steady, long continued process. 

The Social/Emotional Dimension 

While the physical, spiritual, and mental dimensions are closely 
related to Habits 1, 2, and 3 — centered on the principles of personal 
vision, leadership, and management — the social/emotional dimen- 
sion focuses on Habits 4, 5, and 6 — centered on the principles of 
interpersonal leadership, empathic communication, and creative 
cooperation. 

The social and the emotional dimensions of our lives are tied to- 
gether because our emotional life is primarily, but not exclusively, 
developed out of and manifested in our relationships with others. 

Renewing our social/emotional dimension does not take time in 
the same sense that renewing the other dimensions does. We can 
do it in our normal everyday interactions with other people. But it 
definitely requires exercise. We may have to push ourselves 
because many of us have not achieved the level of Private Victory 
and the skills of Public Victory necessary for Habits 4, 5, and 6 to 
come naturally to us in all our interactions. 

Suppose that you are a key person in my life. You might be my 
boss, my subordinate, my coworker, my friend, my neighbor, my 
spouse, my child, a member of my extended family — anyone with 
whom I want or need to interact. Suppose we need to communicate 
together, to work together, to discuss a jugular issue, to accomplish 
a purpose or solve a problem. But we see things differently; we're 
looking through different glasses. You see the young lady, and 1 
see the old woman. 

So I practice Habit 4. I come to you and 1 say, "1 can see that 
we're approaching this situation differently. Why don't we agree to 
communicate until we can find a solution we both feel good about. 
Would you be wiUing to do that?" Most people would be willing to 
say "yes" to that. 

Then 1 move to Habit 5. "Let me listen to you first." Instead of 
listening with intent to reply, 1 listen empathically in order to 
deeply, thoroughly understand your paradigm. When 1 can explain 
your point of view as well as you can, then I focus on com- 



298 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

municating my point of view to you so that you can understand it 
as well. 

Based on the commitment to search for a solution that we both 
feel good about and a deep understanding of each other's points of 
view, we move to Habit 6. We work together to produce third 
alternative solutions to our differences that we both recognize are 
better than the ones either you or I proposed initially. 

Success in Habits 4, 5, and 6 is not primarily a matter of intellect; 
it's primarily a matter of emotion. It's highly related to our sense of 
personal security. 

If our personal security comes from sources within ourselves, 
then we have the strength to practice the habits of Public Victory. 
If we are emotionally insecure, even though we may be intellectu- 
ally very advanced, practicing Habits 4, 5, and 6 with people who 
think differently on jugular issues of life can be terribly threatening. 

Where does intrinsic security come from? It doesn't come from 
what other people think of us or how they treat us. It doesn't come 
from the scripts they've handed us. It doesn't come from our 
circumstances or our position. 

It comes from within. It comes from accurate paradigms and 
correct principles deep in our own mind and heart. It comes from 
inside-out congruence, from living a life of integrity in which our 
daily habits reflect our deepest values. 

I believe that a life of integrity is the most fundamental source of 
personal worth. I do not agree with the popular success literature 
that says that self-esteem is primarily a matter of mind set, of 
attitude — that you can psych yourself into peace of mind. 

Peace of mind comes when your life is in harmony with true 
principles and values and in no other way. 

There is also the intrinsic security that comes as a result of 
effective interdependent living. There is security in knowing that 
Win/Win solutions do exist, that life is not always "either/or," that 
there are almost always mutually beneficial Third Alternatives. 
There is security in knowing that you can step out of your own 
frame of reference without giving it up, that you can really, deeply 
understand another human being. There is security that comes 
when you authentically, creatively and cooperatively interact with 
other people and really experience these interdependent habits. 

There is intrinsic security that comes from service, from helping 
other people in a meaningful way. One important source is your 
work, when you see yourself in a contributive and creative mode. 



HABIT 7 SHARPEN THE SAW 299 

really making a difference. Another source is anonymous service — 
no one knows it and no one necessarily ever will. And that's not 
the concern; the concern is blessing the lives of other people. 
Influence, not recognition, becomes the motive. 

Victor Frankl focused on the need for meaning and purpose in 
our lives, something that transcends our own lives and taps the 
best energies within us. The late Dr. Hans Selye, in his 
monumental research on stress, basically says that a long, 
healthy, and happy life is the result of making contributions, of 
having meaningful projects that are personally exciting and 
contribute to and bless the lives of others. His ethic was "earn thy 
neighbor's love." 

In the words of George Bernard Shaw, 

This is the true joy in life — that being used for a purpose 
recognized by yourself as a mighty one. That being a force of nature, 
instead of a feverish, selfish little clod of ailments and grievances 
complaining that the world will not devote itself to making you 
happy. 1 am of the opinion that my life belongs to the whole 
community and as long as 1 live it is my privilege to do for it 
whatever I can. I want to be thoroughly used up when 1 die. For the 
harder I work the more I live. I rejoice in life for its own sake. Life 
is no brief candle to me. It's a sort of splendid torch which I've got 
to hold up for the moment and I want to make it burn as brightly as 
possible before handing it on to future generations. 

N. Eldon Tanner has said, "Service is the rent we pay for the 
privilege of living on this earth." And there are so many ways to 
serve. Whether or not we belong to a church or service organization 
or have a job that provides meaningful service opportunities, not a 
day goes by that we can't at least serve one other human being by 
making deposits of unconditional love. 

Scripting Others 

Most people are a function of the social mirror, scripted by the 
opinions, the perceptions, the paradigms of the people around 
them. As interdependent people, you and I come from a paradigm 
which includes the realization that we are a part of that social 
mirror. 

We can choose to reflect back to others a clear, undistorted vision 
of themselves. We can affirm their proactive nature and treat them 



300 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

as responsible people. We can help script them as principle- 
centered, value-based, independent, worthwhile individuals. And, 
with the Abundance Mentality, we realize that giving a positive 
reflection to others in no way diminishes us. It increases us 
because it increases the opportunities for effective interaction with 
other proactive people. 

At some time in your hfe, you probably had someone believe in 
you when you didn't believe in yourself. They scripted you. Did 
that make a difference in your life? 

What if you were a positive scripter, an affirmer, of other people? 
When they're being directed by the social mirror to take the lower 
path, you inspire them toward a higher path because you believe 
in them. You listen to them and empathize with them. You don't 
absolve them of responsibility; you encourage them to be proac- 
tive. 

Perhaps you are familiar with the musical, Man of La Mancha. It's 
a beautiful story about a medieval knight who meets a woman of 
the street, a prostitute. She's being validated in her life-style by all 
of the people in her life. 

But this poet knight sees something else in her, something 
beautiful and lovely. He also sees her virtue, and he affirms it, over 
and over again. He gives her a new name — Dulcinea — a new name 
associated with a new paradigm. 

At first, she utterly denies it; her old scripts are overpowering. 
She writes him off as a wild-eyed fantasizer. But he is persistent. 
He makes continual deposits of unconditional love and gradually it 
penetrates her scripting. It goes down into her true nature, her 
potential, and she starts to respond. Little by little, she begins to 
change her hfe-style. She believes it and she acts from her new 
paradigm, to the initial dismay of everyone else in her life. 

Later, when she begins to revert to her old paradigm, he calls her 
to his deathbed and sings that beautiful song, "The Impossible 
Dream," looks her in the eyes, and whispers, "Never forget, 
you're Dulcinea." 

One of the classic stories in the field of self-fulfilling prophecies 
is of a computer in England that was accidently programmed 
incorrectly. In academic terms, it labeled a class of "bright" kids 
"dumb" kids and a class of supposedly "dumb" kids "bright." 
And that computer report was the primary criterion that created 



HABIT 7 SHARPEN THE SAW 301 

the teachers' paradigms about their students at the beginning of 
the year. 

When the administration finally discovered the mistake five and 
a half months later, they decided to test the kids again without 
telling anyone what had happened. And the results were amazing. 
The "bright" kids had gone down significantly in IQ test points. 
They had been seen and treated as mentally limited, uncoopera- 
tive, and difficult to teach. The teachers' paradigms had become a 
self-fulfilling prophecy. 

But scores in the supposedly "dumb" group had gone up. The 
teachers had treated them as though they were bright, and their 
energy, their hope, their optimism, their excitement had reflected 
high individual expectations and worth for those kids. 

These teachers were asked what it was like during the first few 
weeks of the term. "For some reason, our methods weren't 
working," they replied. "So we had to change our methods." The 
information showed that the kids were bright. If things weren't 
working well, they figured it had to be the teaching methods. So 
they worked on methods. They were proactive; they worked in 
their Circle of Influence. Apparent learner disability was nothing 
more or less than teacher inflexibility. 

What do we reflect to others about themselves? And how much 
does that reflection influence their lives? We have so much we can 
invest in the Emotional Bank Accounts of other people. The more 
we can see people in terms of their unseen potential, the more we 
can use our imagination rather than our memory, with our spouse, 
our children, our coworkers or employees. We can refuse to label 
them — we can "see" them in new fresh ways each time we're with 
them. We can help them become independent, fulfilled people 
capable of deeply satisfying, enriching, and productive relation- 
ships with others. 

Goethe taught, "Treat a man as he is and he will remain as he is. 
Treat a man as he can and should be and he will become as he can 
and should be." 

Balance in Renewal 

The self-renewal process must include balanced renewal in all 
four dimensions of our nature: the physical, the spiritual, the 
mental, and the social/emotional. 



302 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

Although renew^al in each dimension is important, it only 
becomes optimally effective as we deal with all four dimensions in 
a wise and balanced way. To neglect any one area negatively 
impacts the rest. 

I have found this to be true in organizations as well as in 
individual lives. In an organization, the physical dimension is 
expressed in economic terms. The mental or psychological dimen- 
sion deals with the recognition, development, and use of talent. 
The social/emotional dimension has to do with human relations, 
with how people are treated. And the spiritual dimension deals 
with finding meaning through purpose or contribution and 
through organizational integrity. 

When an organization neglects any one or more of these areas, 
it negatively impacts the entire organization. The creative energies 
that could result in tremendous, positive synergy are instead used 
to fight against the organization and become restraining forces to 
growth and productivity. 

I have found organizations whose only thrust is economic — to 
make money. They usually don't publicize that purpose. They 
sometimes even publicize something else. But in their hearts, their 
only desire is to make money. 

Whenever I find this, I also find a great deal of negative synergy 
in the culture, generating such things as interdepartmental rival- 
ries, defensive and protective communication, politicking, and 
masterminding. We can't effectively thrive without making money, 
but that's not sufficient reason for organizational existence. We 
can't live without eating, but we don't live to eat. 

At the other end of the spectrum, I've seen organizations that 
focused almost exclusively on the social/emotional dimension. 
They are, in a sense, some kind of social experiment and they have 
no economic criteria to their value system. They have no measure 
or gauge of their effectiveness, and as a result, they lose all kinds 
of efficiencies and eventually their viability in the marketplace. 

I have found many organizations that develop as many as three 
of the dimensions — they may have good service criteria, good 
economic criteria, and good human relations criteria, but they are 
not really committed to identifying, developing, utilizing, and 
recognizing the talent of people. And if these psychological forces 
are missing, the style will be a benevolent autocracy and the 
resulting culture will reflect different forms of collective resistance, 
adversarialism, excessive turnover, and other deep, chronic, cul- 
tural problems. 



HABIT 7 SHARPEN THE SAW 303 

Organizational as well as individual effectiveness requires devel- 
opment and renewal of all four dimensions in a wise and balanced 
way. Any dimension that is neglected will create negative force 
field resistance that pushes against effectiveness and growth. 
Organizations and individuals that give recognition to each of 
these four dimensions in their mission statement provide a pow- 
erful framework for balanced renewal. 

This process of continuous improvement is the hallmark of the 
Total Quality Movement and a key to Japan's economic ascen- 
dency. 

Synergy in Renewal 

Balanced renewal is optimally synergetic. The things you do to 
sharpen the saw in any one dimension have positive impact in 
other dimensions because they are so highly interrelated. Your 
physical health affects your mental health; your spiritual strength 
affects your social/emotional strength. As you improve in one 
dimension, you increase your ability in other dimensions as well. 

The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People create optimum 
synergy among these dimensions. Renewal in any dimension 
increases your ability to live at least one of the Seven Habits. And 
although the habits are sequential, improvement in one habit 
synergetically increases your ability to live the rest. 

The more proactive you are (Habit 1), the more effectively you 
can exercise personal leadership (Habit 2) and management (Habit 
3) in your life. The more effectively you manage your life (Habit 3), 
the more Quadrant II renewing activities you can do (Habit 7). The 
more you seek first to understand (Habit 5), the more effectively 
you can go for synergetic Win/Win solutions (Habits 4 and 6). The 
more you improve in any of the habits that lead to independence 
(Habits 1, 2, and 3), the more effective you will be in interdepen- 
dent situations (Habits 4, 5, and 6). And renewal (Habit 7) is the 
process of renewing all the habits. 

As you renew your physical dimension, you reinforce your 
personal vision (Habit 1), the paradigm of your own self-awareness 
and free will, of proactivity, of knowing that you are free to act 
instead of being acted upon, to choose your own response to any 
stimulus. This is probably the greatest benefit of physical exercise. 
Each Daily Private Victory makes a deposit in your personal 
intrinsic security account. 

As you renew your spiritual dimension, you reinforce your 



304 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

personal leadership (Habit 2). You increase your ability to live out 
of your imagination and conscience instead of only your memory, 
to deeply understand your innermost paradigms and values, to 
create within yourself a center of correct principles, to define your 
ow^n unique mission in life, to rescript yourself to live your life in 
harmony with, correct principles and to draw^ upon your personal 
sources of strength. The rich private life you create in spiritual 
renewal makes tremendous deposits in your personal security 
account. 

As you renew your mental dimension, you reinforce your 
personal management (Habit 3). As you plan, you force your mind 
to recognize high leverage Quadrant II activities, priority goals, 
and activities to maximize the use of your time and energy, and 
you organize and execute your activities around your priorities. As 
you become involved in continuing education, you increase your 
knowledge base and you increase your options. Your economic 
security does not lie in your job; it lies in your own power to 
produce — to think, to learn, to create, to adapt. That's true 
financial independence. It's not having wealth; it's having the 
power to produce wealth. It's intrinsic. 

The Daily Private Victory — a minimum of one hour a day in 
renewal of the physical, spiritual, and mental dimensions — is the 
key to the development of the Seven Habits and it's completely 
within your Circle of Influence. It is the Quadrant II focus time 
necessary to integrate these habits into your life, to become 
principle-centered . 

It's also the foundation for the Daily Public Victory. It's the 
source of intrinsic security you need to sharpen the saw in the 
social/emotional dimension. It gives you the personal strength to 
focus on your Circle of Influence in interdependent situations — to 
look at others through the Abundance Mentality paradigm, to 
genuinely value their differences and to be happy for their success. 
It gives you the foundation to work for genuine understanding and 
for synergetic WinA^^in solutions, to practice Habits 4, 5, and 6 in 
an interdependent reality. 

The Upward Spiral 

Renewal is the principle — and the process — that empowers us to 
move on an upward spiral of growth and change, of continuous 
improvement. 



HABIT 7 SHARPEN THE SAW 305 

To make meaningful and consistent progress along that spiral, 
we need to consider one other aspect of renewal as it applies to the 
unique human endowment that directs this upward movement — 
our conscience. In the words of Madame de Stael, "The voice of 
conscience is so delicate that it is easy to stifle it: but it is also so 
clear that it is impossible to mistake it." 

Conscience is the endowment that senses our congruence or 
disparity with correct principles and lifts us toward them — when 
it's in shape. 

Just as the education of nerve and sinew is vital to the excellent 
athlete and education of the mind is vital to the scholar, education 
of the conscience is vital to the truly proactive, highly effective 
person. Training and educating the conscience, however, requires 
even greater concentration, more balanced discipline, more con- 
sistently honest living. It requires regular feasting on inspiring 
literature, thinking noble thoughts and, above all, living in har- 
mony with its still small voice. 

Just as junk food and lack of exercise can ruin an athlete's 
condition, those things that are obscene, crude, or pornographic 
can breed an inner darkness that numbs our higher sensibilities 
and substitutes the social conscience of "Will I be found out?" for 
the natural or divine conscience of "What is right and wrong?" 

In the words of Dag Hammarskjold, 

You cannot play with the animal in you without becoming wholly 
animal, play with falsehood without forfeiting your right to truth, 
play with cruelty without losing your sensitivity of mind. He who 
wants to keep his garden tidy doesn't reserve a plot for weeds. 

Once we are self-aware, we must choose purposes and principles 
to live by; otherwise the vacuum will be filled, and we will lose our 
self-awareness and become like groveling animals who live prima- 
rily for survival and propagation. People who exist on that level 
aren't living; they are "being lived." They are reacting, unaware of 
the unique endowments that lie dormant and undeveloped within. 

And there is no shortcut in developing them. The law of the 
harvest governs; we will always reap what we sow — no more, no 
less. The law of justice is immutable, and the closer we align 
ourselves with correct principles, the better our judgment will be 
about how the world operates and the more accurate our 
paradigms — our maps of the territory — will be. 



306 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

I believe that as we grow and develop on this upward spiral, we 
must show diligence in the process of renewal by educating and 
obeying our conscience. An increasingly educated conscience will 
propel us along the path of personal freedom, security, wisdom, 
and power. 

Moving along the upward spiral requires us to learn, commit, and 
do on increasingly higher planes. We deceive ourselves if we think 
that any one of these is sufficient. To keep progressing, we must 
learn, commit, and do — learn, commit, and do — and learn, com- 
mit, and do again. 



Commit 




THE UPWARD SPIRAL 

Application Suggestions: 

1 . Make a list of activities that would help you keep in good physical 
shape, that w^ould fit your life-style and that you could enjoy over 
time. 

2. Select one of the activities and list it as a goal in your personal role 
area for the coming week. At the end of the week evaluate your 



HABIT 7 SHARPEN THE SAW 307 

performance. If you didn't make your goal, was it because you 
subordinated it to a genuinely higher value? Or did you fail to act 
with integrity to your values? 

3. Make a similar list of renewing activities in your spiritual and 
mental dimensions. In your social-emotional area, list relation- 
ships you would like to improve or specific circumstances in 
which Public Victory would bring greater effectiveness. Select 
one item in each area to list as a goal for the week. Implement and 
evaluate. 

4. Commit to write down specific "sharpen the saw" activities in all 
four dimensions every week, to do them, and to evaluate your 
performance and results. 



Inside-Out Again 



The Lord works from the inside out. The 
world works from the outside in. The world 
would take people out of the slums. Christ 
takes the slums out of people, and then they 
take themselves out of the slums. The world 
would mold men by changing their 
environment. Christ changes men, who then 
change their environment. The world would 
shape human behavior, but Christ can change 
human nature. 

Ezra Taft Benson 



I WOULD LIKE TO SHARE WITH YOU 3 persoFial stoiy which I feel contains 
the essence of this book. In doing so, it is my hope that you will 
relate to the underlying principles it contains. 

Some years ago, our family took a sabbatical leave from the 
university where I taught so that I could write. We lived for a full 
year in Laie on the north shore of Oahu, Hawaii. 

Shortly after getting settled, we developed a living and working 
routine which was not only very productive but extremely pleas- 
ant. 

After an early morning run on the beach, we would send two of 
our children, barefoot and in shorts, to school. I went to an isolated 
building next to the canefields where I had an office to do my 
writing. It was very quiet, very beautiful, very serene — no phone, 
no meetings, no pressing engagements. 

My office was on the outside edge of a college, and one day as I 
was wandering between stacks of books in the back of the college 
library, I came across a book that drew my interest. As I opened it, 

309 



310 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

my eyes fell upon a single paragraph that powerfully influenced 
the rest of my life. 

I read the paragraph over and over again. It basically contained 
the simple idea that there is a gap or a space between stimulus and 
response, and that the key to both our growth and happiness is 
how we use that space. 

I can hardly describe the effect that idea had on my mind. 
Though I had been nurtured in the philosophy of self-determinism, 
the way the idea was phrased — "a gap between stimulus and 
response" — hit me with fresh, almost unbelievable force. It was 
almost like "knowing it for the first time," like an inward revolu- 
tion, "an idea whose time had come." 

I reflected on it again and again, and it began to have a powerful 
effect on my paradigm of life. It was as if I had become an observer 
of my own participation. I began to stand in that gap and to look 
outside at the stimuli. I reveled in the inward sense of freedom to 
choose my response — even to become the stimulus, or at least to 
influence it — even to reverse it. 

Shortly thereafter, and partly as a result of this "revolutionary" 
idea, Sandra and I began a practice of deep communication. I 
would pick her up a little before noon on an old red Honda 90 trail 
cycle, and we would take our two preschool children with us — one 
between us and the other on my left knee — as we rode out in the 
canefields by my office. We rode slowly along for about an hour, 
just talking. 

The children looked forward to the ride and hardly ever made 
any noise. We seldom saw another vehicle, and the cycle was so 
quiet we could easily hear each other. We usually ended up on an 
isolated beach where we parked the Honda and walked about 200 
yards to a secluded spot where we ate a picnic lunch. 

The sandy beach and a freshwater river coming off the island 
totally absorbed the interest of the children, so Sandra and I were 
able to continue our talks uninterrupted. Perhaps it doesn't take 
too much imagination to envision the level of understanding and 
trust we were able to reach by spending at least two hours a day, 
every day, for a full year in deep communication. 

At the very first of the year, we talked about all kinds of 
interesting topics — people, ideas, events, the children, my writing, 
our family at home, future plans, and so forth. But little by little, 
our communication deepened and we began to talk more and more 
about our internal worlds — about our upbringing, our scripting. 



INSIDE-OUT AGAIN 311 

our feelings and self-doubts. As we were deeply immersed in these 
communications, we also observed them and observed ourselves 
in them. We began to use that space between stimulus and 
response in some new and interesting ways which caused us to 
think about how we were programmed and how those programs 
shaped how we saw the world. 

We began an exciting adventure into our interior worlds and 
found it to be more exciting, more fascinating, more absorbing, 
more compelling, more filled with discovery and insight than 
anything we'd ever known in the outside world. 

It wasn't all "sweetness and light." We occasionally hit some 
raw nerves and had some painful experiences, embarrassing 
experiences, self-revealing experiences — experiences that made us 
extremely open and vulnerable to each other. And yet we found 
we had been wanting to go into those things for years. When we 
did go into the deeper, more tender issues and then came out of 
them, we felt in some way healed. 

We were so initially supportive and helpful, so encouraging and 
empathic to each other, that we nurtured and facilitated these 
internal discoveries in each other. 

We gradually evolved two unspoken ground rules. The first was 
"no probing." As soon as we unfolded the inner layers of vulner- 
ability, we were not to question each other, only to empathize. 
Probing was simply too invasive. It was also too controlling and 
too logical. We were covering new, difficult terrain that was scary 
and uncertain, and it stirred up fears and doubts. We wanted to 
cover more and more of it, but we grew to respect the need to let 
each other open up in our own time. 

The second ground rule was that when it hurt too much, when it 
was painful, we would simply quit for the day. Then we would 
either begin the next day where we left off or wait until the person 
who was sharing felt ready to continue. We carried around the loose 
ends, knowing that we wanted to deal with them. But because we 
had the time and the environment conducive to it, and because we 
were so excited to observe our own involvement and to grow within 
our marriage, we simply knew that sooner or later we would deal 
with all those loose ends and bring them to some kind of closure. 

The most difficult, and eventually the most fruitful part of this 
kind of communication came when my vulnerability and Sandra's 
vulnerability touched. Then, because of our subjective involve- 
ment, we found that the space between stimulus and response was 



312 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

no longer there. A few bad feelings surfaced. But our deep desire 
and our implicit agreement was to prepare ourselves to start where 
we left off and deal with those feelings until we resolved them. 

One of those difficult times had to do with a basic tendency in 
my personality. My father was a very private individual — very 
controlled and very careful. My mother was and is very public, 
very open, very spontaneous. I find both sets of tendencies in me, 
and when I feel insecure, I tend to become private, like my father. 
I live inside myself and safely observe. 

Sandra is more like my mother — social, authentic, and sponta- 
neous. We had gone through many experiences over the years in 
which I felt her openness was inappropriate, and she felt my 
constraint was dysfunctional, both socially and to me as an 
individual because I would become insensitive to the feelings of 
others. All of this and much more came out during those deep 
visits. I came to value Sandra's insight and wisdom and the way 
she helped me to be a more open, giving, sensitive, social person. 

Another of those difficult times had to do with what I perceived 
to be a "hang up" Sandra had which had bothered me for years. 
She seemed to have an obsession about Frigidaire appliances 
which I was at an absolute loss to understand. She would not even 
consider buying another brand of appliance. Even when we were 
just starting out and on a very tight budget, she insisted that we 
drive the fifty miles to the "big city" where Frigidaire appliances 
were sold, simply because no dealer in our small university town 
carried them at that time. 

This was a matter of considerable agitation to me. Fortunately, 
the situation came up only when we purchased an appliance. But 
when it did come up, it was like a stimulus that triggered off a hot 
button response. This single issue seemed to be symbolic of all 
irrational thinking, and it generated a whole range of negative 
feelings within me. 

I usually resorted to my dysfunctional private behavior. I sup- 
pose I figured that the only way I could deal with it was not to deal 
with it; otherwise, I felt I would lose control and say things I 
shouldn't say. There were times when I did slip and say something 
negative, and I had to go back and apologize. 

What bothered me the most was not that she liked Frigidaire, but 
that she persisted in making what I considered utterly illogical 
and indefensible statements to defend Frigidaire which had no 
basis in fact whatsoever. If she had only agreed that her response 



INSIDE-OUT AGAIN 313 

was irrational and purely emotional, I think I could have handled 
it. But her justification was upsetting. 

It was sometime in early spring when the Frigidaire issue came 
up. All our prior communication had prepared us. The ground 
rules had been deeply established — not to probe and to leave it 
alone if it got to be too painful for either or both. 

I will never forget the day we talked it through. We didn't end 
up on the beach that day; we just continued to ride through the 
canefields, perhaps because we didn't want to look each other in 
the eye. There had been so much psychic history and so many bad 
feelings associated with the issue, and it had been submerged for 
so long. It had never been so critical as to rupture the relationship, 
but when you're trying to cultivate a beautiful unified relationship, 
any divisive issue is important. 

Sandra and I were amazed at what we learned through the 
interaction. It was truly synergistic. It was as if Sandra were 
learning, almost for the first time herself, the reason for her 
so-called hang-up. She started to talk about her father, about how 
he had worked as a high school history teacher and coach for 
years, and how, to help make ends meet, he had gone into the 
appliance business. During an economic downturn, he had expe- 
rienced serious financial difficulties, and the only thing that 
enabled him to stay in business during that time was the fact that 
Frigidaire would finance his inventory. 

Sandra had an unusually deep and sweet relationship with her 
father. When he returned home at the end of a very tiring day, he 
would lie on the couch, and Sandra would rub his feet and sing to 
him. It was a beautiful time they enjoyed together almost daily for 
years. He would also open up and talk through his worries and 
concerns about the business, and he shared with Sandra his deep 
appreciation for Frigidaire financing his inventory so that he could 
make it through the difficult times. 

This communication between father and daughter had taken 
place in a spontaneous way during very natural times, when the 
most powerful kind of scripting takes place. During those relaxed 
times guards are down and all kinds of images and thoughts are 
planted deep in the subconscious mind. Perhaps Sandra had 
forgotten about all of this until the safety of that year of commu- 
nication when it could come out also in very natural and sponta- 
neous ways. 

Sandra gained tremendous insight into herself and into the 



314 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

emotional root of her feelings about Frigidaire. I also gained insight 
and a whole new^ level of respect. I came to realize that Sandra 
wasn't talking about appliances; she was talking about her father, 
and about loyalty — about loyalty to his needs. 

I remember both of us becoming tearful on that day, not so much 
because of the insights, but because of the increased sense of 
reverence we had for each other. We discovered that even seem- 
ingly trivial things often have roots in deep emotional experiences. 
To deal only with the superficial trivia without seeing the deeper, 
more tender issues is to trample on the sacred ground of another's 
heart. 

There were many rich fruits of those months. Our communica- 
tion became so powerful that we could almost instantly connect 
with each other's thoughts. When we left Hawaii, we resolved to 
continue the practice. During the many years since, we have 
continued to go regularly on our Honda trail cycle, or in the car if 
the weather's bad, just to talk. We feel the key to staying in love is 
to talk, particularly about feelings. We try to communicate with 
each other several times every day, even when I'm travelling. It's 
like touching in to home base, which accesses all the happiness, 
security, and values it represents. 

Thomas Wolfe was wrong. You can go home again — if your 
home is a treasured relationship, a precious companionship. 

Intergenerational Living 

As Sandra and I discovered that wonderful year, the ability to 
use wisely the gap between stimulus and response, to exercise the 
four unique endowments of our human nature, empowered us 
from the inside out. 

We had tried the outside-in approach. We loved each other, and 
we had attempted to work through our differences by controlling 
our attitudes and our behaviors, by practicing useful techniques of 
human interaction. But our band-aids and aspirin only lasted so 
long. Until we worked and communicated on the level of our 
essential paradigms, the chronic underlying problems were still 
there. 

When we began to work from the inside out, we were able to 
build a relationship of trust and openness and to resolve dysfunc- 
tional differences in a deep and lasting way that never could have 
come by working from the outside in. The delicious fruits — a rich 



INSIDE-OUT AGAIN 315 

WinAVin relationship, a deep understanding of each other, and a 
marvellous synergy — grew out of the roots we nurtured as we 
examined our programs, rescripted ourselves, and managed our 
lives so that we could create time for the important Quadrant II 
activity of communicating deeply with each other. 

And there were other fruits. We were able to see on a much 
deeper level that, just as powerfully as our own lives had been 
affected by our parents, the lives of our children were being 
influenced and shaped by us, often in ways we didn't even begin 
to realize. Understanding the power of scripting in our own lives, 
we felt a renewed desire to do everything we could to make certain 
that what we passed on to future generations, by both precept and 
example, was based on correct principles. 

I have drawn particular attention in this book to those scripts we 
have been given which we proactively want to change. But as we 
examine our scripting carefully, many of us will also begin to see 
beautiful scripts, positive scripts that have been passed down to us 
which we have blindly taken for granted. Real self-awareness 
helps us to appreciate those scripts and to appreciate those who 
have gone before us and nurtured us in principle-based living, 
mirroring back to us not only what we are, but what we can 
become. 

There is transcendant power in a strong intergenerational family. 
An effectively interdependent family of children, parents, grand- 
parents, aunts, uncles, and cousins can be a powerful force in 
helping people have a sense of who they are and where they came 
from and what they stand for. 

It's great for children to be able to identify themselves with the 
"tribe," to feel that many people know them and care about them, 
even though they're spread all over the country. And that can be 
a tremendous benefit as you nurture your family. If one of your 
children is having difficulty and doesn't really relate with you at a 
particular time in his hfe, maybe he can relate to your brother or 
sister who can become a surrogate father or mother, a mentor or a 
hero for a period of time. 

Grandparents who show a great interest in their grandchildren 
are among the most precious people on this earth. What a 
marvellous positive social mirror they can be! My mother is like 
that. Even now, in her late 80's, she takes a deep personal interest 
in every one of her descendants. She writes us love letters. I was 
reading one the other day on a plane with tears streaming down 



316 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

my cheeks. I could call her up tonight and I know she'd say, 
"Stephen, I want you to know how much I love you and how 
wonderful I think you are." She's constantly reaffirming. 

A strong intergenerational family is potentially one of the most 
fruitful, rewarding, and satisfying interdependent relationships. 
And many people feel the importance of that relationship. Look at 
the fascination we all had with Roofs some years ago. Each of us 
has roots and the ability to trace those roots, to identify our 
ancestors. 

The highest and most powerful motivation in doing that is not 
for ourselves only, but for our posterity, for the posterity of all 
mankind. As someone once observed, "There are only two lasting 
bequests we can give our children — one is roots, the other wings." 

Becoming a Transition Person 

Among other things, I believe that giving "wings" to our 
children and to others means empowering them with the freedom 
to rise above negative scripting that had been passed down to us. 
I believe it means becoming what my friend and associate. Dr. 
Terry Warner, calls a "transition" person. Instead of transferring 
those scripts to the next generation, we can change them. And we 
can do it in a way that will build relationships in the process. 

If your parents abused you as a child, that does not mean that 
you have to abuse your own children. Yet there's plenty of 
evidence to indicate that you will tend to live out that script. But 
because you're proactive, you can rewrite the script. You can 
choose not only not to abuse your children, but to affirm them, to 
script them in positive ways. 

You can write it in your personal mission statement and into 
your mind and heart. You can visualize yourself living in harmony 
with that mission statement in your Daily Private Victory. You can 
take steps to love and forgive your own parents, and if they are still 
living, to build a positive relationship with them by seeking to 
understand. 

A tendency that's run through your family for generations can 
stop with you. You're a transition person — a link between the past 
and the future. And your own change can affect many, many lives 
downstream. 

One powerful transition person of the twentieth century, Anwar 
Sadat, left us as part of his legacy a profound understanding of the 



INSIDE-OUT AGAIN 317 

nature of change. Sadat stood between a past that had created a 
"huge wall of suspicion, fear, hate and misunderstanding" be- 
tween Arabs and Israelis, and a future in which increased conflict 
and isolation seemed inevitable. Efforts at negotiation had been 
met with objections on every scale — even to formalities and 
procedural points, to an insignificant comma or period in the text 
of proposed agreements. 

While others attempted to resolve the tense situation by hacking 
at the leaves, Sadat drew upon his earlier centering experience in 
a lonely prison cell and went to work on the root. And in doing so, 
he changed the course of history for millions of people. 

He records in his autobiography: 

It was then that 1 drew, almost unconsciously, on the inner 
strength I had developed in Cell 54 of Cairo Central Prison — a 
strength, call it a talent or capacity, for change. I found that I faced 
a highly complex situation, and that I couldn't hope to change it 
until I had armed myself with the necessary psychological and 
intellectual capacity. My contemplation of life and human nature in 
that secluded place had taught me that he who cannot change the 
very fabric of his thought will never be able to change reality, and 
will never, therefore, make any progress. 

Change — real change — comes from the inside out. It doesn't 
come from hacking at the leaves of attitude and behavior with 
quick fix personality ethic techniques. It comes from striking at the 
root — the fabric of our thought, the fundamental, essential para- 
digms, which give definition to our character and create the lens 
through which we see the world. In the words of Amiel, 

Moral truth can be conceived in thought. One can have feelings 
about it. One can will to live it. But moral truth may have been 
penetrated and possessed in all these ways, and escape us still. 
Deeper even than consciousness there is our being itself — our very 
substance, our nature. Only those truths which have entered into 
this last region, which have become ourselves, become spontaneous 
and involuntary as well as voluntary, unconscious as well as 
conscious, are really our life — that is to say, something more than 
property. So long as we are able to distinguish any space whatever 
between Truth and us we remain outside it. The thought, the 
feeling, the desire or the consciousness of life may not be quite life. 
To become divine is then the aim of life. Then only can truth be said 



318 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

to be ours beyond the possibility of loss. It is no longer outside us, 
nor in a sense even in us, but we are it, and it is we. 

Achieving unity — oneness — w^ith ourselves, with our loved ones, 
with our friends and working associates, is the highest and best 
and most delicious fruit of the Seven Habits. Most of us have tasted 
this fruit of true unity from time to time in the past, as we have also 
tasted the bitter, lonely fruit of disunity — and we know how 
precious and fragile unity is. 

Obviously building a character of total integrity and living the 
life of love and service that creates such unity isn't easy. It isn't 
quick fix. 

But it's possible. It begins with the desire to center our lives on 
correct principles, to break out of the paradigms created by other 
centers and the comfort zones of unworthy habits. 

Sometimes we make mistakes, we feel awkward. But if we start 
with the Daily Private Victory and work from the inside out, the 
results will surely come. As we plant the seed and patiently weed 
and nourish it, we begin to feel the excitement of real growth and 
eventually taste the incomparably delicious fruits of a congruent, 
effective life. 

Again, I quote Emerson: "That which we persist in doing 
becomes easier — not that the nature of the task has changed, but 
our ability to do has increased." 

By centering our lives on correct principles and creating a 
balanced focus between doing and increasing our ability to do, we 
become empowered in the task of creating effective, useful, and 
peaceful lives . . . for ourselves, and for our posterity. 



INSIDE-OUT AGAIN 319 



A Personal Note 

As I conclude this book, I would like to share my own personal 
conviction concerning what I believe to be the source of correct 
principles. I believe that correct principles are natural laws, and 
that God, the Creator and Father of us all, is the source of them, 
and also the source of our conscience. I believe that to the degree 
people live by this inspired conscience, they will grow to fulfill 
their natures; to the degree that they do not, they will not rise 
above the animal plane. 

I believe that there are parts to human nature that cannot be 
reached by either legislation or education, but require the power of 
God to deal with. I believe that as human beings, we cannot perfect 
ourselves. To the degree to which we align ourselves with correct 
principles, divine endowments will be released within our nature 
in enabling us to fulfill the measure of our creation. In the words of 
Teilhard de Chardin, "We are not human beings having a spiritual 
experience. We are spiritual beings having a human experience." 

I personally struggle with much of what I have shared in this 
book. But the struggle is worthwhile and fulfilling. It gives 
meaning to my life and enables me to love, to serve, and to try 
again. 

Again, T. S. Eliot expresses so beautifully my own personal 
discovery and conviction: "We must not cease from exploration. 
And the end of all our exploring will be to arrive where we began 
and to know the place for the first time." 



Appendix 
A 



POSSIBLE PERCEPTIONS 
FLOWING out of 

VARIOUS CENTERS 


[something deleted]


Appendix 
B 



A Quadrant ii day 

at the OFFICE 



THE FOLLOWING EXERCISE AND ANALYSIS is designed to help you see the 
impact of a Quadrant II paradigm in a business setting on a 
very practical level. 

Suppose that you are the director of marketing for a major 
pharmaceutical firm. You are about to begin an average day at the 
office, and as you look over the items to attend to that day, you 
estimate the amount of time each one will take. 
Your unprioritized list includes the following: 

1. You'd like to have lunch with the general manager (1-11/2 
hours). 

2. You were instructed the day before to prepare your media 
budget for the following year (2 or 3 days). 

3. Your "IN" basket is overflowing into your "OUT" basket (1-1 V2 
hours). 

4. You need to talk to the sales manager about last month's sales; 
his office is down the hall ( 4 hours). 

5. You have several items of correspondence that your secretary 
says are urgent (1 hour). 

6. You'd like to catch up on the medical journals piled upon your 
desk (1/2 hour). 

7. You need to prepare a presentation for a sales meeting slated for 
next month (2 hours). 

8. There's a rumor that the last batch of product X didn't pass 
quality control. 

9. Someone from the FDA wants you to return his call about 
product "X" (1/2 hour). 

10. There is a meeting at two p.m. for the executive board, but you 
don't know what it is about (1 hour). 

Take a few minutes now and use what you have learned from 
Habits 1, 2, and 3 that might help you to effectively schedule your 
day. 



353 



334 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

8-to-5 Schedule 



8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 



By asking you to plan only one day, I have automatically 
eliminated the wider context of the week so fundamental to fourth 
generation time management. But you will be able to see the power 
of a Quadrant II, principle-centered paradigm even in the context 
of one nine-hour period of time. 

It is fairly obvious that most of the items on the list are Quadrant 
I activities. With the exception of item number six — catching up on 
medical journals — everything else is seemingly both important and 
urgent. 

If you were a third generation time manager, using prioritized 
values and goals, you would have a framework for making such 
scheduling decisions and would perhaps assign a letter such as A, 
B, or C next to each item and then number 1, 2, 3 under each A, B, 
and C. You would also consider the circumstances, such as the 
availability of other people involved, and the logical amount of 
time required to eat lunch. Finally, based on all of these factors, 
you would schedule the day. 

Many third generation time managers who have done this 
exercise do exactly what I have described. They schedule when 
they will do what, and based on various assumptions which are 
made and explicitly identified, they would accomplish or at least 
begin most of the items in that day and push the remainder onto 
the next day or to some other time. 

For instance, most people indicate that they would use the time 
between eight and nine a.m. to find out exactly what was on the 
agenda for the executive board meeting so that they could prepare 



APPENDIX B 335 

for it, to set up lunch with the general manager around noon, and 
to return the call from the FDA. They usually plan to spend the 
next hour or two talking to the sales manager, handling those 
correspondence items which are most important and urgent, and 
checking out the rumor regarding the last batch of product "X" 
which apparently didn't pass quality control. The rest of that 
morning is spent in preparing for the luncheon visit with the 
general manager and/or for the two p.m. executive board meeting, 
or dealing with whatever problems were uncovered regarding 
product "X" and last month's sales. 

After lunch, the afternoon is usually spent attending to the 
unfinished matters just mentioned and/or attempting to finish the 
other most important and urgent correspondence, making some 
headway into the overflowing 'TN" basket, and handling other 
important and urgent items that may have come up during the 
course of the day. 

Most people feel the media budget preparations for the following 
year and the preparation for the next month's sales meeting could 
probably be put off until another day, which may not have as many 
Quadrant I items in it. Both of those are obviously more Quadrant 
II activities, having to do with long-term thinking and planning. 
The medical journals continue to be set aside because they are 
clearly Quadrant II and are probably less important than the other 
two Quadrant II matters just mentioned. 

This is the kind of thinking which third generation time manag- 
ers generally go through, even though they may vary as to when 
they will do what. 

What approach did you take as you scheduled those items? Was 
it similar to the third generation approach? Or did you take a 
Quadrant II, fourth generation approach? (Refer to the Time 
Management Matrix on page 151.) 

The Quadrant II Approach 

Let's go through the items on the list using a Quadrant II 
approach. This is only one possible scenario; others could be 
created, which may also be consistent with the Quadrant II 
paradigm, but this is illustrative of the kind of thinking it embodies. 

As a Quadrant II manager, you would recognize that most P 
activities are in Quadrant I and most PC activities are in Quadrant 
II. You would know that the only way to make Quadrant I 
manageable is to give considerable attention to Quadrant II, 



336 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

primarily by working on prevention and opportunity and by 
having the courage to say "no" to Quadrants III and IV. 

The TWO p.m. Board Meeting. We w^ill assume the two p.m. executive 
board meeting did not have an agenda for the attending executives, 
or perhaps you would not see the agenda until you arrived at the 
meeting. This is not uncommon. As a result, people tend to come 
unprepared and to "shoot from the hip." Such meetings are 
usually disorganized and focus primarily on Quadrant I issues, 
which are both important and urgent, and around which there is 
often a great deal of sharing of ignorance. These meetings generally 
result in wasted time and inferior results and are often httle more 
than an ego trip for the executive in charge. 

In most meetings. Quadrant II items are usually categorized as 
"other business." Because "work expands to fill the time allotted 
for its completion" in accordance with Parkinson's Law, there 
usually isn't time to discuss them. If there is, people have been so 
beaten and smashed by Quadrant I, they have little or no energy 
left to address them. 

So you might move into Quadrant II by first attempting to get 
yourself on the agenda so that you can make a presentation 
regarding how to optimize the value of executive board meetings. 
You might also spend an hour or two in the morning preparing for 
that presentation, even if you are only allowed a few minutes to 
stimulate everyone's interest in hearing a more extended prepara- 
tion at the next board meeting. This presentation would focus on 
the importance of always having a clearly specified purpose for 
each meeting and a well thought out agenda to which each person 
at the meeting has had the opportunity to contribute. The final 
agenda would be developed by the chairman of the executive 
board and would focus first on Quadrant II issues that usually 
require more creative thinking rather than Quadrant I issues that 
generally involve more mechanical thinking. 

The presentation would also stress the importance of having 
minutes sent out immediately following the meeting, specifying 
assignments given and dates of accountability. These items would 
then be placed on appropriate future agendas which would be sent 
out in plenty of time for others to prepare to discuss them. 

Now this is what might be done by looking at one item on the 
schedule — the two p.m. executive board meeting — through a Quad- 
rant II frame of reference. This requires a high level of proactivity. 



APPENDIX B 337 

including the courage to challenge the assumption that you even 
need to schedule the items in the first place. It also requires 
consideration in order to avoid the kind of crisis atmosphere that 
often surrounds a board meeting. 

Almost every other item on the list can be approached with the 
same Quadrant II thinking, with perhaps the exception of the FDA 
call. 

Returning the FDA Call. Based on the background of the quality of 
the relationship with the FDA, you make that call in the morning 
so that whatever it reveals can be dealt with appropriately. This 
might be difficult to delegate, since another organization is in- 
volved that may have a Quadrant I culture and an individual who 
wants you, and not some delegatee, to respond. 

While you may attempt to directly influence the culture of your 
own organization as a member of the executive board, your Circle 
of Influence is probably not large enough to really influence the 
culture of the FDA, so you simply comply with the request. If you 
find the nature of the problem uncovered in the phone call is 
persistent or chronic, then you may approach it from a Quadrant II 
mentality in an effort to prevent such problems in the future. This 
again would require considerable proactivity to seize the opportu- 
nity to transform the quality of the relationship with the FDA or to 
work on the problems in a preventive way. 

Lunch with the General Manager. You might see having lunch with 
the general manager as a rare opportunity to discuss some longer- 
range. Quadrant II matters in a fairly informal atmosphere. This 
may also take thirty to sixty minutes in the morning to adequately 
prepare for, or you may simply decide to have a good social 
interaction and listen carefully, perhaps without any plan at all. 
Either possibility may present a good opportunity to build your 
relationship with the general manager. 

Preparing the Media Budget. Regarding item number two, you might 
call in two or three of your associates most directly connected to 
media budget preparation and ask them to bring their recommen- 
dations in the form of "completed staff work" (which may only 
require your initials to finally approve) or perhaps to outline two or 
three well-thought-out options you can choose from and identify 
the consequences of each option. This may take a full hour 
sometime during the day — to go over desired results, guidelines. 



338 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

resources, accountability, and consequences. But by investing this 
one hour, you tap the best thinking of concerned people w^ho may 
have different points of view^. If you haven't taken this approach 
before, you may need to spend more time to train them in what 
this approach involves, what "completed staff work" means, how 
to synergize around differences and what identifying alternative 
options and consequences involves. 

The "IN" Basket and Correspondence. Instead of diving into the "IN" 
basket, you would spend some time, perhaps thirty to sixty 
minutes, beginning a training process with your secretary so that 
he or she could gradually become empowered to handle the "IN" 
basket as well as the correspondence under item number five. This 
training program might go on for several weeks, even months, 
until your secretary or assistant is really capable of being results- 
minded rather than methods-minded. 

Your secretary could be trained to go through all correspondence 
items and all "IN" basket items, to analyze them and to handle as 
many as possible. Items that could not be handled with confidence 
could be carefully organized, prioritized, and brought to you with 
a recommendation or a note for your own action. In this way, 
within a few months your secretary or executive assistant could 
handle 80 to 90 percent of all of the "IN" basket items and 
correspondence, often much better than you could handle them 
yourself, simply because your mind is so focused on Quadrant II 
opportunities instead of buried in Quadrant I problems. 

The Sales Manager and Last Month's Sales. A possible Quadrant II 
approach to item number four would be to think through the entire 
relationship and performance agreement with that sales manager 
to see if the Quadrant II approach is being used. The exercise 
doesn't indicate what you need to talk to the sales manager about, 
but assuming it's a Quadrant I item, you could take the Quadrant 
II approach and work on the chronic nature of the problem as well 
as the Quadrant I approach to solve the immediate need. 

Possibly you could train your secretary to handle the matter 
without your involvement and bring to your attention only that 
which you need to be aware of. This may involve some Quadrant 
II activity with your sales manager and others reporting to you so 
they understand that your primary function is leadership rather 
than management. They can begin to understand that they can 



APPENDIX B 339 

actually solve the problem better with your secretary than with 
you, and free you for Quadrant II leadership activity. 

If you feel that the sales manager might be offended by having 
your secretary make the contact, then you could begin the process 
of building that relationship so that you can eventually win the 
confidence of the sales manager toward your both taking a more 
beneficial Quadrant II approach. 

Catching Up on Medical Journals. Reading medical journals is a 
Quadrant II item you may want to procrastinate. But your own 
long-term professional competence and confidence may largely be 
a function of staying abreast of this literature. So, you may decide 
to put the subject on the agenda for your own staff meeting, where 
you could suggest that a systematic approach to reading the 
medical journals be set up among your staff. Members of the staff 
could study different journals and teach the rest the essence of 
what they learn at future staff meetings. In addition, they could 
supply others with key articles or excerpts which everyone really 
needs to read and understand. 

Preparing for Next Month's Sales Meeting. Regarding item number 
seven, a possible Quadrant II approach might be to call together a 
small group of the people who report to you and charge them to 
make a thorough analyisis of the needs of the salespeople. You 
could assign them to bring a completed staff work recommendation 
to you by a specified date within a week or ten days, giving you 
enough time to adapt it and have it implemented. This may involve 
their interviewing each of the salespeople to discover their real 
concerns and needs, or it might involve sampling the sales group 
so that the sales meeting agenda is relevant and is sent out in 
plenty of time so that the salespeople can prepare and get involved 
in it in appropriate ways. 

Rather than prepare the sales meeting yourself, you could 
delegate that task to a small group of people who represent 
different points of view and different kinds of sales problems. Let 
them interact constructively and creatively and bring to you a 
finished recommendation. If they are not used to this kind of 
assignment, you may spend some of that meeting challenging and 
training them, teaching them why you are using this approach and 
how it will benefit them as well. In doing so, you are beginning to 
train your people to think long-term, to be responsible for com- 



340 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

pleting staff work or other desired results, to creatively interact 
w^ith each other in interdependent ways, and to do a quality job 
within specified deadlines. 

Product "X" and Quality Control. Now let's look at item number 
eight regarding product "X," which didn't pass quality control. 
The Quadrant II approach would be to study that problem to see if 
it has a chronic or persistent dimension to it. If so, you could 
delegate to others the careful analysis of that chronic problem with 
instructions to bring to you a recommendation, or perhaps simply 
to implement what they come up with and inform you of the 
results. 

The net effect of this Quadrant II day at the office is that you are 
spending most of your time delegating, training, preparing a board 
presentation, making one phone call, and having a productive 
lunch. By taking a long-term PC approach, hopefully in a matter of 
a few weeks, perhaps months, you won't face such a Quadrant I 
scheduling problem again. 

As you go through this analysis, you may be thinking this 
approach seems idealistic. You may be wondering if Quadrant II 
managers ever work in Quadrant I. 

I admit it is idealistic. This book is not about the habits of highly 
ineffective people; it's about habits of highly effective people. And to 
be highly effective is an ideal to work toward. 

Of course you'll need to spend time in Quadrant I. Even the best 
laid plans in Quadrant II sometimes aren't realized. But Quadrant 
I can be significantly reduced into more manageable proportions so 
that you're not always into the stressful crisis atmosphere that 
negatively affects your judgment as well as your health. 

Undoubtedly it will take considerable patience and persistence, 
and you may not be able to take a Quadrant II approach to all or 
even most of these items at this time. But if you can begin to make 
some headway on a few of them and help create more of a 
Quadrant II mind-set in other people as well as yourself, then 
downstream there will be quantum improvements in performance. 

Again, I acknowledge that in a family setting or a small business 
setting, such delegation may not be possible. But this does not 
preclude a Quadrant II mind-set which would produce interesting 
and creative ways within your Circle of Influence to reduce the size 
of Quadrant I crises through the exercise of Quadrant II initiative. 



About the Author 



Stephen R. Covey is the founder and Chairman of the Board of an 
organization devoted to the development of principle-centered 
leadership based on many of the ideas described in this book. The 
mission statement of the organization reads: 

Our mission 

is to empower people and organizations 

to significantly increase their performance capability 

in order to achieve worthwhile purposes 

through understanding and living 

principle-centered leadership. 

This empowerment process is largely carried out through pro- 
grams conducted at the Leadership Center in the Rocky Mountains 
of Utah. In addition, the company provides on-site development 
programs for organizations, both domestically and internationally, 
on many subjects in addition to the Seven Habits. 

Seven Habits products and programs provide a wide range of 
resources for the empowerment of individuals, families, business 
and nonprofit and educational organizations, including: 

The Seven Habits Executive Organizer 

The Seven Habits Pocket Organizer 

Seven Habits Audio Learning System {eight-tape set) 

Seven Habits Audio Tapes (four-tape set) 

Seven Habits Effectiveness Profile 

{anonymous feedback on individual effectiveness) 

The Seven Habits Video-Based Leadership Development Course 

Seven Habits Facilitator Training 

Connections: Quadrant II Time Management 



The Executive Excellence Newsletter 

Advanced Leadership Week {an executive retreat) 

Seven Habits Seminars 

Custom On-Site Programs and Speeches 



Covey Leadership Center 

Jamestown Square 

Provo, Utah 84604 

1-800-255-0777 



(continued from front flap) 

"One of the greatest habits you can develop is to 
learn and internalize the wisdom of Stephen Covey. 
He lives what he says and this book can help you live, 
permanently, in the 'Winner's Circle.' " 

— Dr. Denis Waitley, author of 
The Psychology of Winning 



About the Author 

Stephen R. Covey is chairman of the Covey Leader- 
ship Center and the nonprofit Institute for Principle- 
Centered Leadership. The firm does leadership 
development worldwide with over 100 of the Fortune 
500 companies as well as with thousands of midsize 
and small companies, educational institutions, and 
all levels of government. Former Administrative 
Assistant to the President at the nation's largest pri- 
vate university Voted one often best resources by the 
Young Presidents' Organization. MBA from Harvard 
and a doctorate from Brigham Young University 
Adjunct Professor at the Marriott School of Manage- 
ment, BYU. Author of several books and numerous 
articles on leadership, personal effectiveness, family 
and interpersonal relationships. He is married to 
Sandra Merrill Covey, and they are the parents of 
nine children. 

"When Stephen Covey talks, executives listen." 
— Dun's Business Month 




Jacket design by Barry Littmann 

Author photograph by Christensen Photography, Provo, Utah 

Printed in the U.S.A. Copyright © 1989 Simon & Schuster Inc. 



Advance praise for 

fflBTHABITSfflHIGHLY 
~i EFFECTIVE PEOPLE 

"I've never known any teacher or mentor on improving personal effectiveness to generate 
such an overwhelmingly positive reaction from hundreds and hundreds of Procter and 
Gamble managers — and that includes me. This book captures beautifully Stephen's phi- 
losophy of principles. I think anyone reading it will quickly understand the enormous 
reaction I and others have had to E)r. Covey's teachings." 

— John Pepper, President, Procter and Gamble 

"Few students of management and organization — and people — have thought as long and 
hard about first principles as Stephen Covey In The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, 
he offers us an opportunity, not a how-to guide. The opportunity is to explore ourselves and 
our impact on others and to do so by taking advantage of his profound insights. It is a 
wonderful book that could change your life." 

— Tom Peters, author of In Search of Excellence 

"Stephen Covey has produced a master companion for anyone to carry . . . through life. The 
readers' view of themselves and the way they live their lives will never be the same, and they 
will be forever grateful for the discovery We would do well to make the reading and use of 
this book a requirement for anyone at any level of public service. It would be far more 
effective than any legislation regarding ethical conduct." 

— Senator Jake Gam, first senator in space 

"At a time when American organizations desperately need to energize people and produce 
leaders at all levels. Covey provides an empowering philosophy for life that is also the best 
guarantee of success in business. . .a perfect blend of wisdom, compassion, and practical 
experience." 

— Rosabeth Moss Kanter, Professor of Business Administration, 
Harvard , and author of When Giants Learn to Dance 

"Stephen R. Covey is a marvelous human being. He writes insightfully and he cares about 
people. The equivalent of an entire library of success literature is found in this one volume. 
The principles he teaches in The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People have made a real 
difference in my life." 

— Ken Blanchard, Ph.D. , author of 77i^ One-Minute Manager 

"Knowledge is the quickest and safest path to success in any area of life. Steve Covey has 
encapsulated the strategies used by all those who are highly effective. Success can be 
learned and this book is a highly effective way to learn it." 

— Charles Givens, President, Charles J. Givens Organization, Inc., 
author of Wealth Without Risk 



51 995 



9 '780671"663988 



DflflinM5 




